Medically Reviewed byDr. Abhinav SinghWritten by
Eric Suni
If you’re one of the millions of Americans who struggle with insomnia, you may find your mind racing and your body tossing and turning when you just want to be asleep.With the right approach, you can reliably fall asleep within a matter of minutes. One of the keys to smoothly falling asleep is relaxation. Research shows that the relaxation response is a physiological process that positively affects both the mind and body.By reducing stress and anxiety, the relaxation response can enable you to peacefully drift off to sleep. Our step-by-step guides offer proven relaxation methods that may help with insomnia and other sleep problems.Experts emphasize that it can take time to master these techniques, but the practice pays off. Even better, these methods are customizable, so you can adjust them over time to make them work for you.For thousands of years, relaxation has been a central focus of spiritual and cultural practices, enabling a sense of calm and connection with oneself and the surrounding world.Only in recent decades, though, have meditative practices for relaxation become a focus of scientific research, which has come to identify four key elements for fostering the relaxation response.All of the following methods are ways of achieving these core elements so that you can calmly fall asleep. Keeping these basics in mind empowers you to adjust these methods to suit your preferences.Once you’re lying comfortably in bed, try one of these techniques to put yourself at ease and settle gently into sleep.Why It Works:A series of slow, deep breaths can enable a sense of calm. This method, also known as pranayamic breathing, is believed to help reduce stress in the nervous system and may prepare the brain for sleep by reducing excitatory stimulus.How to Do It:Option 1: Counting BreathsOption 2: Dr. Andrew Weil’s 4-7-8 MethodWho It’s Great For:Controlled breathing is excellent for people just getting started with relaxation techniques or who have difficulty using other objects of focus like imagery or mantras.Why It Works:Mindfulness is centered around slow, steady breathing and a non-judgmental focus on the present moment. By reducing anxiety and rumination, it has been found to have sweeping health benefits, including an ability to help reduce insomnia.How to Do It: There are many variations of mindfulness meditation for different situations. One easy to use style is the body scan meditation.This version is adapted from UC-Berkeley’s Greater Good in Action (GGIA) program that offers audio recordings for this and other mindfulness meditations.Who It’s Great For: Anyone can meditate, including with mindfulness meditation, but it can take more practice to get used to. As a result, it usually works best for people who can devote at least five minutes per day to increase their comfort with it.Why It Works: Progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) creates a calming effect by gradually tightening and releasing muscles throughout the body in conjunction with controlled breathing.How to Do It:Who it’s Great For: Studies have found that PMR can help people with insomnia, and when done carefully, may be beneficial for people who are bothered by arthritis or other forms of physical pain. PMR is not recommended for people with uncontrolled cardiovascular problems.Why It Works: Visualizing a peaceful image from your past and all of its details engages your attention in order to promote relaxation.How to Do It: Who it’s Great For:Visual thinkers who easily recall past scenes replete with details are ideally suited to using imagery as part of their bedtime relaxation.Negative consequences are rare for relaxation techniques, but a small number of people find that they can provoke anxiety. Anyone with concerns about trying these methods should talk with their doctor for specific advice before getting started.Even experts in meditation find that their minds can wander during these relaxation techniques, so don’t worry if it happens to you. Instead, stay calm, keep breathing slowly, and try to bring your mind back to the main focus of attention.If you get into bed and cannot fall asleep after 20 minutes, get up, go to another part of your house, and do something soothing, such as reading or listening to quiet music.Lying awake in bed for too long can create an unhealthy mental connection between your sleeping environment and wakefulness. Instead, you want your bed to conjure thoughts and feelings conducive to sleep.Before you actually get into bed, a few simple tips can help make sure your mind and body are prepared to fall asleep easily:Beyond the immediate run-up to bedtime, incorporating fundamental sleep tips can aid in falling asleep and prevent serious sleeping problems.Medically Reviewed byDr. Abhinav SinghWritten by
Eric Suni
Insomnia is a sleep disorder that affects as many as 35% of adults. It is marked by problems getting to…Whether it’s a jolt after a cup of coffee or drowsiness after Thanksgiving dinner, most people have personally experienced how…The relationship between exercise and sleep has been extensively investigated over the years. Previous studies have noted that proper exercise…Get the latest sleep news, information and research.Your email address will only be used to receive SleepFoundation.org newsletters. Further information can be found in our Privacy PolicyNecessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website.The Sleep Foundation editorial team is dedicated to providing content that meets the highest standards for accuracy and objectivity. Our editors and medical experts rigorously evaluate every article and guide to ensure the information is factual, up-to-date, and free of bias.The Sleep Foundation fact-checking guidelines are as follows:Sleeping difficulty is when you have trouble sleeping at night. It may be hard for you to fall asleep, or you may wake up several times throughout the night.Sleep difficulty may affect your physical and mental health. Lack of sleep may also cause you to have frequent headaches or trouble concentrating.Most people experience difficulty sleeping at some point in their lives. Some people may feel refreshed after only six or seven hours of sleep. However, most adults need about eight hours of sleep every night to feel rested. Signs of sleeping difficulty may include an inability to focus during the day, frequent headaches, irritability, daytime fatigue, waking up too early, waking up throughout the night, or taking several hours to fall asleep.You may also experience low energy during the day or have noticeably dark circles under your eyes.There are many possible reasons for sleeplessness, including your sleeping habits, lifestyle choices, and medical conditions. Some causes are minor and may improve with self-care, while others may require you to seek medical attention.Causes of sleeplessness may include aging, too much stimulation before bedtime (such as watching television, playing video games, or exercising), consuming too much caffeine, noise disturbances, an uncomfortable bedroom, or a feeling of excitement. Sleeping too much during the day, lack of exposure to sunlight, frequent urination, physical pain, jet lag, and some prescription medications may also lead to difficulty sleeping. For many people, stress, worry, depression, or work schedules may also affect their sleep. For others, sleep issues are due to a sleep disorder such as insomnia, sleep apnea, and restless legs syndrome.Sleeplessness may also occur in infants. It’s normal for newborns to wake up several times throughout the night. However, most infants will start to sleep through the night after they’re 6 months old.If an older infant is showing signs of sleeplessness, it may be a sign that they’re teething, sick, hungry, or bothered by gas or digestive problems.Obstructive sleep apnea is a condition where there’s a blockage in the upper airways. This results in pauses in breathing throughout the night that may cause you to abruptly wake up, often with a choking sound. Snoring commonly occurs in this disorder.Restless legs syndrome may also trigger sleeping difficulty. This condition causes uncomfortable sensations in your legs, such as tingling or aching. These sensations give you the urge to make your legs move frequently, including while resting, which can interrupt your sleep.Delayed sleep phase disorder is another condition that can affect sleep. This condition causes a delay in the 24-hour cycle of sleep and wakefulness. You may not feel sleepy or fall asleep until the middle of the night. This sleep cycle makes it harder for you to wake up in the early morning and leads to daytime fatigue.You should see a doctor if your sleeping difficulties are ongoing and affecting your quality of life. They’ll attempt to find the underlying cause of your sleeplessness by conducting a physical examination and asking questions about your sleep patterns. You can connect to a physician in your area using the Healthline FindCare tool.During your appointment, be sure to tell your doctor about any prescription medications, over-the-counter products, and herbal supplements that you take. Some medications and supplements cause overstimulation and can disrupt your sleep if taken too close to bedtime.You should also mention if you’re experiencing other problems, such as depression, anxiety, or chronic pain. These factors may also affect your ability to sleep.To determine the cause of sleeplessness, your doctor may recommend that you keep a sleep diary.You should record your entire day’s activities and sleep habits, such as the time you went to bed, the time you woke up, the amount of food and the drinks you consumed, your mood, any medications you took, your activity level, and your quality of sleep.Keeping a sleep record helps your doctor pinpoint habits that may trigger sleep issues.If your doctor suspects you have sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, or another sleep disorder, they may schedule a sleep study test. For this test, you’ll spend the night in a hospital or sleep center. A sleep specialist will observe you throughout the night. Your blood pressure, heart rate, breathing, oxygen level, and brain waves will be monitored for any signs of a sleep disorder.Treatment for your sleeplessness depends on its cause. In some cases, at-home remedies or simple lifestyle changes can improve the quality of your sleep. You may want to avoid caffeine and alcohol for at least a few or more hours before bed.Limit any daytime napping to 30 minutes or none at all if possible. Keep your bedroom dark and cool. Avoid stimulating activities before bedtime, and allow seven to eight hours for sleep each night. Listening to soothing music and taking a hot bath before bedtime may also help. Keep a regular sleep schedule.You may also purchase some sleep aids without a prescription. However, sleep aids can cause daytime drowsiness if you don’t get a full seven or eight hours of sleep. Also, don’t use these products on a daily basis, as it may lead to a dependency.Remember to always read the directions closely and take the medication as directed. If a medical condition or sleep disorder is causing your problems, you’ll need treatment for the underlying condition.For example, if your sleep is affected by anxiety disorder or depression, your doctor may prescribe an anti-anxiety or antidepressant medication to help you cope with worry, stress, and feelings of hopelessness.If left untreated, chronic sleep problems can greatly affect your qualify of life. Your reaction time when driving may decrease, which increases your risk of an accident.Poor sleep quality may also reduce your performance levels on the job or at school. It may also weaken your immune system, resulting in more colds and illnesses. Talk to your doctor if your sleeping problems become frequent. Your doctor can help recommend various treatment methods. Last medically reviewed on  July 15, 2019Being unable to sleep is incredibly frustrating, and it can make you feel miserable the next day. Here are 20 simple tips to fall asleep as fast as…This article lists 17 evidence-based tips to sleep better at night. Getting good sleep is very important for optimal health.If you live with insomnia, you may want to learn how cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help. Learn how CBT works for insomnia. Insomnia makes it difficult for you to fall asleep, stay asleep, or both. Get information on risk factors, symptoms, tests, treatments, and home…Falling asleep may be easy some nights and elusive on others. We'll discuss the average time it takes a person to fall asleep.Here's what you should know about how long melatonin lasts in your body after usage and how that can affect your daytime and nighttime routines.Researchers say a lack of sleep may prevent the heart from getting the rest it needs.OUR BRANDSSleeping difficulty is when you have trouble sleeping at night. It may be hard for you to fall asleep, or you may wake up several times throughout the night.Sleep difficulty may affect your physical and mental health. Lack of sleep may also cause you to have frequent headaches or trouble concentrating.Most people experience difficulty sleeping at some point in their lives. Some people may feel refreshed after only six or seven hours of sleep. However, most adults need about eight hours of sleep every night to feel rested. Signs of sleeping difficulty may include an inability to focus during the day, frequent headaches, irritability, daytime fatigue, waking up too early, waking up throughout the night, or taking several hours to fall asleep.You may also experience low energy during the day or have noticeably dark circles under your eyes.There are many possible reasons for sleeplessness, including your sleeping habits, lifestyle choices, and medical conditions. Some causes are minor and may improve with self-care, while others may require you to seek medical attention.Causes of sleeplessness may include aging, too much stimulation before bedtime (such as watching television, playing video games, or exercising), consuming too much caffeine, noise disturbances, an uncomfortable bedroom, or a feeling of excitement. Sleeping too much during the day, lack of exposure to sunlight, frequent urination, physical pain, jet lag, and some prescription medications may also lead to difficulty sleeping. For many people, stress, worry, depression, or work schedules may also affect their sleep. For others, sleep issues are due to a sleep disorder such as insomnia, sleep apnea, and restless legs syndrome.Sleeplessness may also occur in infants. It’s normal for newborns to wake up several times throughout the night. However, most infants will start to sleep through the night after they’re 6 months old.If an older infant is showing signs of sleeplessness, it may be a sign that they’re teething, sick, hungry, or bothered by gas or digestive problems.Obstructive sleep apnea is a condition where there’s a blockage in the upper airways. This results in pauses in breathing throughout the night that may cause you to abruptly wake up, often with a choking sound. Snoring commonly occurs in this disorder.Restless legs syndrome may also trigger sleeping difficulty. This condition causes uncomfortable sensations in your legs, such as tingling or aching. These sensations give you the urge to make your legs move frequently, including while resting, which can interrupt your sleep.Delayed sleep phase disorder is another condition that can affect sleep. This condition causes a delay in the 24-hour cycle of sleep and wakefulness. You may not feel sleepy or fall asleep until the middle of the night. This sleep cycle makes it harder for you to wake up in the early morning and leads to daytime fatigue.You should see a doctor if your sleeping difficulties are ongoing and affecting your quality of life. They’ll attempt to find the underlying cause of your sleeplessness by conducting a physical examination and asking questions about your sleep patterns. You can connect to a physician in your area using the Healthline FindCare tool.During your appointment, be sure to tell your doctor about any prescription medications, over-the-counter products, and herbal supplements that you take. Some medications and supplements cause overstimulation and can disrupt your sleep if taken too close to bedtime.You should also mention if you’re experiencing other problems, such as depression, anxiety, or chronic pain. These factors may also affect your ability to sleep.To determine the cause of sleeplessness, your doctor may recommend that you keep a sleep diary.You should record your entire day’s activities and sleep habits, such as the time you went to bed, the time you woke up, the amount of food and the drinks you consumed, your mood, any medications you took, your activity level, and your quality of sleep.Keeping a sleep record helps your doctor pinpoint habits that may trigger sleep issues.If your doctor suspects you have sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, or another sleep disorder, they may schedule a sleep study test. For this test, you’ll spend the night in a hospital or sleep center. A sleep specialist will observe you throughout the night. Your blood pressure, heart rate, breathing, oxygen level, and brain waves will be monitored for any signs of a sleep disorder.Treatment for your sleeplessness depends on its cause. In some cases, at-home remedies or simple lifestyle changes can improve the quality of your sleep. You may want to avoid caffeine and alcohol for at least a few or more hours before bed.Limit any daytime napping to 30 minutes or none at all if possible. Keep your bedroom dark and cool. Avoid stimulating activities before bedtime, and allow seven to eight hours for sleep each night. Listening to soothing music and taking a hot bath before bedtime may also help. Keep a regular sleep schedule.You may also purchase some sleep aids without a prescription. However, sleep aids can cause daytime drowsiness if you don’t get a full seven or eight hours of sleep. Also, don’t use these products on a daily basis, as it may lead to a dependency.Remember to always read the directions closely and take the medication as directed. If a medical condition or sleep disorder is causing your problems, you’ll need treatment for the underlying condition.For example, if your sleep is affected by anxiety disorder or depression, your doctor may prescribe an anti-anxiety or antidepressant medication to help you cope with worry, stress, and feelings of hopelessness.If left untreated, chronic sleep problems can greatly affect your qualify of life. Your reaction time when driving may decrease, which increases your risk of an accident.Poor sleep quality may also reduce your performance levels on the job or at school. It may also weaken your immune system, resulting in more colds and illnesses. Talk to your doctor if your sleeping problems become frequent. Your doctor can help recommend various treatment methods. Last medically reviewed on  July 15, 2019Being unable to sleep is incredibly frustrating, and it can make you feel miserable the next day. Here are 20 simple tips to fall asleep as fast as…This article lists 17 evidence-based tips to sleep better at night. Getting good sleep is very important for optimal health.If you live with insomnia, you may want to learn how cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help. Learn how CBT works for insomnia. Insomnia makes it difficult for you to fall asleep, stay asleep, or both. Get information on risk factors, symptoms, tests, treatments, and home…Falling asleep may be easy some nights and elusive on others. We'll discuss the average time it takes a person to fall asleep.Here's what you should know about how long melatonin lasts in your body after usage and how that can affect your daytime and nighttime routines.Researchers say a lack of sleep may prevent the heart from getting the rest it needs.OUR BRANDSAs a precautionary health measure for our support specialists in light of COVID-19, we're operating with a limited team. If you need help with a product whose support you had trouble reaching over the phone, consult its product-specific Help Center.Learn more about
  Google's Product Experts ProgramIt’s, oh, I don’t know, 3 o’clock in the freaking morning, and I’m lying in bed, flipping my pillow around in frustration. I’m trying to stay hopeful that I can catch a few hours of shut-eye before I have to get up.But I’ve been through this enough times to know the beast of insomnia can’t always be tamed.I’m not alone. Insomnia is incredibly common in the United States. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, about 30 percent of American adults have some type of insomnia, and it’s more common in women than in men.For anyone out there who has developed an expertise in fruitlessly counting sheep, we’ve rounded up a few strategies for finally catching those long-lost Zzz’s. And if you’re reading this at 3 a.m. because your mind won’t stop racing, don’t worry.We have tips for what you can do right now to improve your chances of getting (at least some) sleep.Insomnia is the inability to fall asleep, stay asleep, or get the amount of sleep you need to wake up feeling rested. Insomnia can be acute (lasting one to several nights) or chronic (occurring three times a week for at least three months). Walia HK, et al. Overview of common sleep disorders and intersection with dermatologic conditions. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4881480/ Its symptoms include: The causes of insomnia range from a variety of underlying medical or psychiatric conditions to medication side effects to simple lifestyle factors. So a little detective work is your first step. Try some of the tips below to rule out lifestyle factors that may be behind your sleeplessness.Insomnia is no joke. It can reduce your life expectancy and increase your risk of heart problems, compromised immunity, obesity, diabetes, seizures, and asthma. It’s probably well worth the effort to make some changes now to improve your sleep.One possible reason you’re not getting enough rest is that your bedroom isn’t optimally set up for sleep. The ideal climate is cool, dark, and comfortable.Uncomfortable bedding can lead to poorer sleep quality. A comfortable mattress increases your chances of a satisfying snooze. Check out the National Sleep Foundation’s tips on choosing the right pillow.Exposure to bright lights just before bed might negatively affect your chance of getting quality — and quantity — sleep. Light suppresses the secretion of melatonin, the hormone that influences your circadian rhythms and tells your body it’s night-night time. Assuming you don’t want to sit in the dark for hours, find the happy medium by dimming the lights as bedtime draws near.Also consider changing your light bulbs to ones with a “color temperature” of less than 3,000 kelvins. These soft/warm varieties can reduce the light’s effects on your nervous system.The artificial (or “blue”) light emitted by screens can disrupt your body’s preparations for sleep by stimulating daytime hormones. Reduce your exposure by turning off TVs, phones, and computers at least an hour before bedtime.If you can’t get away from blue lights before bedtime, consider making a small investment in blue-light-blocking glasses.Can’t sleep but don’t want to give up late-night TV? At least dim the screen’s brightness, either manually or with the help of automated programs.Some outside noises — like a busy street or a neighbor’s barking dog — are beyond your control. Cover them up with the sound of a bedside fan, a white noise machine, or other sounds that help with sleep.A dark, cool bedroom environment helps to promote restful sleep. Program the thermostat so that your bedroom’s temperature is between 60 and 75°F. Experiment to find out what temperature works best for you.Use heavy curtains, blackout shades, or an eye mask to block lights. Charge your phone and laptop outside the bedroom — even the tiny bit of light from a charging device can disrupt sleep.Beds should be used only for sleep and sex — nothing else. Bringing work into the bedroom is a surefire way to discourage quality sleep.Prime your body with the same sleep-promoting activities each day. Eventually, they’ll become habit, and so will awesomely restful sleep.Try to stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends. If your alarm goes off at 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, set it for the same time on Saturday and Sunday. The early alarm might make you groan, but you’ll sleep better for it.Every day, spend about 15 minutes addressing problems, so they don’t sneak up when your head hits the pillow. Schedule tasks and resolutions in your calendar. If a particular stressor is keeping you up at night but has a clear end date, this can help get it off your nighttime mind.Record how much and when you sleep, your fatigue levels throughout the day, and any other symptoms you have. Sleep-tracking apps like SleepScore and Sleep Cycle can help with your recording efforts.Sleep tracking serves two purposes. It can identify things you do that help or hurt your chances of a good night’s rest, and it’s a useful tool for a doctor or therapist, should you decide to see one.A healthy body equates to healthier sleep. Take good care of yourself overall with a balanced diet, exercise, and good stress relief, and you’ll have fewer worries come bedtime.Need another reason to quit? Smokers commonly exhibit symptoms of insomnia — possibly because their bodies go into nicotine withdrawal during the night. Jaehne A, et al. How smoking affects sleep: A polysomnographical analysis. DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.06.026Moderate aerobic activity can improve both sleep quality and quantity. For best results, exercise at least three hours before bed so your body has enough time to wind down before you hit the sack.It’s tempting to reach for coffee when you’re tired after a poor night’s sleep, but drinking caffeine can make it harder for you to fall asleep at night, creating a vicious cycle.Research has shown that people who consume more caffeine spend less time sleeping and don’t sleep as well as those who avoid overdoing caffeine [Watson EJ, et al. (2016). Caffeine consumption and sleep quality in Australian adults. DOI: 10.3390/nu8080479].Can’t quit cold turkey? Try limiting caffeine to earlier in the day so it’s out of your system by bedtime.Just 10 to 20 minutes of napping during the day can help you feel more rested. A good power nap can improve your creativity and memory, too! But avoid snoozing any longer than 20 minutes, which could steal time from your nighttime slumber cycles.Increasing your exposure to natural light during the day promotes a healthy balance of that sleep hormone, melatonin. Sunlight tells those ancient receptors inside your body that it’s time to get going with the hunting and foraging and all things not sleep.This helps reinforce the message to do the opposite when it’s dark.Magnesium and B vitamins are two nutrients that may help enhance your sleep. Foods high in magnesium include: Also eat foods like these, which are rich in B vitamins: Valerian, tryptophan, and melatonin are three supplements used to promote sleep, but their effectiveness varies. Research shows that melatonin can help you fall asleep a bit faster and keep you slumbering longer, but results can vary a lot based on which product you buy. Abad VC, et al. (2018). Insomnia in elderly patients: Recommendations for pharmacological management. DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0569-8Check with your doctor before taking any supplement, to make sure it’s safe for you.If designated worry time earlier in the day didn’t fully do the trick, spend some extra time writing down your anxieties. Loose-leaf paper works, but if you scrawl your sorrows in a journal or notebook, you can literally close the book on your worries (at least until morning).Don’t jump straight from your last activity of the day into bed. Give your mind and body a chance to prep for sleep.You’ve probably heard that meditation seems to be good for us in just about every possible way. One meta-analysis found that people who practiced meditation saw improvements in total sleep time and sleep quality.Other relaxation strategies — like yoga, deep breathing, and progressive relaxation — are also effective tools for promoting good sleep.A big meal before bedtime could leave you too stuffed to sleep. Just getting horizontal can create that burny feeling in your throat. Everything slows down during the night, too, and it’s probably not great to have all that food sitting around in your digestive system.Booze might seem like an obvious choice for calming down pre-bedtime, but it can actually disrupt sleep cycles later in the night. You don’t have to give up the good stuff completely. Just drink it with dinner (around 6 o’clock) and skip the nightcap.Don’t work, watch super-stimulating TV shows or movies, read complex material, or think too hard — about anything — before bedtime. See above about getting away from your screens. Working out your brain keeps your body awake.Hey, anything for a good night’s rest. Getting your “O” face on pre-bedtime can help you fall asleep. Why not?Yes, it sucks when it’s 2 a.m. and you still don’t feel tired despite knowing you need rest. But climbing into bed when you don’t feel ready for sleep is setting yourself up for failure.Instead, engage in relaxing activities (like gentle yoga and meditation or listening to soothing music) until you get the strong urge to snooze. If sleep hasn’t come within 20 minutes, get back out of bed and try relaxing activities again until you’re sleepy enough to give it another go.This soothing tea has a calming effect on your brain. A cup or two could get you into a better headspace for sleep.Stepping from warm water into that pre-cooled bedroom will cause your body temperature to drop slightly. This temperature change triggers sleepy feelings by slowing down your body’s metabolic activity.Science doesn’t necessarily back the idea that milk facilitates snoozing. But if you’ve been in the habit of milk before bed since childhood, the suggestion of sleepiness from a cup of warm milk might be strong enough to get you there.You might wonder if this advice contradicts the “no exercise before bed” warning. But some easy leg lifts, squats, or your leg exercise of choice can help divert blood flow to your legs and away from your brain. This can quiet your mind, making it easier to slip into dreamland.It might not work for everybody, but focusing on one thing can help settle down your brain, making sleep easier. Not a fan of these wooly animals? Focusing on your breath (in, out, in, out) is also an effective way to chill out.Imagine yourself drifting into a blissful slumber while practicing deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation: Starting at one end of your body and working your way up or down, clench and then release each section of muscles for instant all-over relaxation.Tried everything and still can’t sleep? It may be time to reach out to the pros for advice.Cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia is a pretty common technique. Also called CBT-I, this therapy typically involves self-monitoring, mental strategies (like developing positive thoughts about sleep), and creating an environment that promotes sleep.Research has shown that it can improve the quality of sleep. Morgan K, et al. (2012). Self-help treatment for insomnia symptoms associated with chronic conditions in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04175.xLearn these strategies with the help of a therapist or with online guidance or books — both are equally effective ways of implementing CBT-I. Not into seeing a therapist? Use a digital program like Sleepio to help you learn and implement CBT practices from the comfort of your home.If you’ve tried everything and sleep remains elusive, it might be time to consult a healthcare professional. A doctor can help rule out any sleep disorders and identify health issues, treatments, or medications that might be getting in the way of a good night’s rest.What definitely won’t do you any good in the getting-to-sleep department: judgments (“I should be asleep”) and catastrophic thinking (“If I don’t get to sleep, I’ll mess up that presentation tomorrow, lose my job, and die tired and alone”). Make the night easier by accepting insomnia for what it is. Let go of judgments and be gentle with yourself. The silver lining? You just might get to see a glorious sunrise. Last medically reviewed on  May 7, 2019If you have a fondness for epic cinematic moods and need to set an atmosphere of concentration for 1 or 2 hours, this playlist is for you. Birth control IUDs are safe and effective, but there can be side effects. Learn if an IUD is right for you. Can’t wake up in the morning and smashing that snooze? The snooze button may be making it harder to wake up.Late-night snack attacks can lead to indigestion, belly bloat, and zero shut-eye. Follow these guidelines for the best foods for sleep.OUR BRANDSSanja Jelic, MD, is board-certified in sleep medicine, critical care medicine, pulmonary disease, and internal medicine. 
Are you tired of waking up more tired than when you went to bed? Does it seem like a good night’s sleep is more elusive than your half-remembered dreams?

If you’ve been having a tough time falling or staying asleep, chances are the cause is either something you’re doing or something you’re not doing. If one of these common causes of not sleeping well applies to you, you may be able to address it.
svetikd / Getty Images
A casual around-the-block stroll with your dog before his bedtime is fine, but a heart-pumping, sweat-dripping cardio workout within three hours of your own bedtime is too much. Your body temperature and heart rate naturally drop as you fall asleep. Exercise raises those two body functions and stimulates your entire nervous system, making it tough to snooze.

The fix: Schedule your workout for the morning, or hit the gym on your lunch hour.
westend61 / Getty Images
A single glass of wine can be a forerunner to romance—and romance itself is one of the best preludes to sleep. But indulge in much more alcohol before bedtime and you’ll probably find that your sleep is impaired.

The initial effect of alcohol is relaxation, so you’ll probably drop off to sleep quickly after imbibing. But alcohol interferes with your sleep cycle, especially the REM sleep that includes dreaming. The result is fragmented, unrefreshing rest. Plus, you’re likely to wake up needing to use the bathroom during the night, a definite hit to your sleep quality.

The fix: Limit alcohol use, especially in the evening.
Fred Paul / Getty Images
Most sleep experts recommend keeping your bedroom at a moderate 65 to 72 degrees at night, but many people like to cut energy costs by turning the thermostat down to the freeze zone during the winter, and switching the AC off during the summer, leading to a sweltering bedroom.

Both of these extremes hijack your trip to the land of Nod, however. Your body needs to cool slightly at night for the most refreshing sleep, which is impossible in an overly heated bedroom. A too-cold room, on the other hand, will wake you up.

The fix: If you don’t want to adjust the thermostat, wear thick socks to a well-blanketed bed during cold snaps and use a fan in the summer. 
Vladimir Godnik / Getty Images
Probably the most common non-medical reason for short-term insomnia is a mind filled with worries or stress. During the day, the activities of life tend to distract you, but once you settle yourself into bed, your mind is free to roam. For most people, it’s not the good aspects of their lives that their mind chooses to focus on, but rather, the negatives.

The fix: You can combat this in several ways.
Shuji Kobayashi / Getty Images
You know a bedtime cup of coffee is a bad idea, but did you know that the half-life of caffeine is three to five hours. That means only half the dose is eliminated during that time, leaving the remaining half to linger in your body. That’s why a late afternoon cup of joe can disrupt your sleep later that night.

The fix: ﻿Although caffeine’s effects on you depend on your tolerance, the dose, and your age, it is best to keep your consumption below 400 mg per day and stay away from caffeine sources after lunchtime. 
Tetra Images / Getty Images
Sharing your bed with a partner, whether human or four-legged, greatly reduces the quality of your sleep if your partner snores, crowds you, hogs the covers, or otherwise makes you uncomfortable. While you’re probably not going to banish your spouse from the bedroom—although a surprisingly high percentage of married couples do sleep in separate rooms—you do need to catch some shut-eye.

The fix: Give Mittens and Fido beds of their own and encourage your snoring partner to sleep on their side, not on their back. Use a white-noise machine to block out the sound of soft snoring or try earplugs if the decibel level reaches a crescendo.
Fuse / Getty Images
Whether it’s coming from your bed partner’s reading lamp, the television, or outside your window, light exposure at bedtime impairs your quality of sleep. For some people, even the glow of a bedside alarm clock is enough to signal their brain that it’s time to wake up.

The fix: Turn off electronics at least an hour before bedtime. If light from an outside source shines into your bedroom and cannot be eliminated, hang blackout shades or curtains (this is especially important if you work nights and need to sleep during the day). Close your bedroom door to shut out light from other areas of the house. For the simplest solution, don a satiny sleep mask before closing your eyes.
Tetra Images / Getty Images
Is your typical bedtime snack a slice (or two) of pizza or a bag of chips? If so, don’t be surprised when you’re lying awake staring at your ceiling.

A full load of fat or protein right before bedtime sends your digestive system into overdrive, making it difficult to sleep and potentially giving you heartburn. But hunger pains can wake you up as well, as can precipitous blood sugar drops during the night.

The fix: Have a small snack before hitting the hay. It should be heavier on complex carbs, lighter on protein, but including both. Good choices include a small bowl of whole-grain cereal and milk, a slice of deli turkey wrapped around a celery stick, or a piece of fruit spread with peanut butter.
Ever wonder what your personality type means? Sign up to find out more in our Healthy Mind newsletter.Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up.There was an error. Please try again.Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up.There was an error. Please try again.It’s, oh, I don’t know, 3 o’clock in the freaking morning, and I’m lying in bed, flipping my pillow around in frustration. I’m trying to stay hopeful that I can catch a few hours of shut-eye before I have to get up.But I’ve been through this enough times to know the beast of insomnia can’t always be tamed.I’m not alone. Insomnia is incredibly common in the United States. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, about 30 percent of American adults have some type of insomnia, and it’s more common in women than in men.For anyone out there who has developed an expertise in fruitlessly counting sheep, we’ve rounded up a few strategies for finally catching those long-lost Zzz’s. And if you’re reading this at 3 a.m. because your mind won’t stop racing, don’t worry.We have tips for what you can do right now to improve your chances of getting (at least some) sleep.Insomnia is the inability to fall asleep, stay asleep, or get the amount of sleep you need to wake up feeling rested. Insomnia can be acute (lasting one to several nights) or chronic (occurring three times a week for at least three months). Walia HK, et al. Overview of common sleep disorders and intersection with dermatologic conditions. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4881480/ Its symptoms include: The causes of insomnia range from a variety of underlying medical or psychiatric conditions to medication side effects to simple lifestyle factors. So a little detective work is your first step. Try some of the tips below to rule out lifestyle factors that may be behind your sleeplessness.Insomnia is no joke. It can reduce your life expectancy and increase your risk of heart problems, compromised immunity, obesity, diabetes, seizures, and asthma. It’s probably well worth the effort to make some changes now to improve your sleep.One possible reason you’re not getting enough rest is that your bedroom isn’t optimally set up for sleep. The ideal climate is cool, dark, and comfortable.Uncomfortable bedding can lead to poorer sleep quality. A comfortable mattress increases your chances of a satisfying snooze. Check out the National Sleep Foundation’s tips on choosing the right pillow.Exposure to bright lights just before bed might negatively affect your chance of getting quality — and quantity — sleep. Light suppresses the secretion of melatonin, the hormone that influences your circadian rhythms and tells your body it’s night-night time. Assuming you don’t want to sit in the dark for hours, find the happy medium by dimming the lights as bedtime draws near.Also consider changing your light bulbs to ones with a “color temperature” of less than 3,000 kelvins. These soft/warm varieties can reduce the light’s effects on your nervous system.The artificial (or “blue”) light emitted by screens can disrupt your body’s preparations for sleep by stimulating daytime hormones. Reduce your exposure by turning off TVs, phones, and computers at least an hour before bedtime.If you can’t get away from blue lights before bedtime, consider making a small investment in blue-light-blocking glasses.Can’t sleep but don’t want to give up late-night TV? At least dim the screen’s brightness, either manually or with the help of automated programs.Some outside noises — like a busy street or a neighbor’s barking dog — are beyond your control. Cover them up with the sound of a bedside fan, a white noise machine, or other sounds that help with sleep.A dark, cool bedroom environment helps to promote restful sleep. Program the thermostat so that your bedroom’s temperature is between 60 and 75°F. Experiment to find out what temperature works best for you.Use heavy curtains, blackout shades, or an eye mask to block lights. Charge your phone and laptop outside the bedroom — even the tiny bit of light from a charging device can disrupt sleep.Beds should be used only for sleep and sex — nothing else. Bringing work into the bedroom is a surefire way to discourage quality sleep.Prime your body with the same sleep-promoting activities each day. Eventually, they’ll become habit, and so will awesomely restful sleep.Try to stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends. If your alarm goes off at 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, set it for the same time on Saturday and Sunday. The early alarm might make you groan, but you’ll sleep better for it.Every day, spend about 15 minutes addressing problems, so they don’t sneak up when your head hits the pillow. Schedule tasks and resolutions in your calendar. If a particular stressor is keeping you up at night but has a clear end date, this can help get it off your nighttime mind.Record how much and when you sleep, your fatigue levels throughout the day, and any other symptoms you have. Sleep-tracking apps like SleepScore and Sleep Cycle can help with your recording efforts.Sleep tracking serves two purposes. It can identify things you do that help or hurt your chances of a good night’s rest, and it’s a useful tool for a doctor or therapist, should you decide to see one.A healthy body equates to healthier sleep. Take good care of yourself overall with a balanced diet, exercise, and good stress relief, and you’ll have fewer worries come bedtime.Need another reason to quit? Smokers commonly exhibit symptoms of insomnia — possibly because their bodies go into nicotine withdrawal during the night. Jaehne A, et al. How smoking affects sleep: A polysomnographical analysis. DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.06.026Moderate aerobic activity can improve both sleep quality and quantity. For best results, exercise at least three hours before bed so your body has enough time to wind down before you hit the sack.It’s tempting to reach for coffee when you’re tired after a poor night’s sleep, but drinking caffeine can make it harder for you to fall asleep at night, creating a vicious cycle.Research has shown that people who consume more caffeine spend less time sleeping and don’t sleep as well as those who avoid overdoing caffeine [Watson EJ, et al. (2016). Caffeine consumption and sleep quality in Australian adults. DOI: 10.3390/nu8080479].Can’t quit cold turkey? Try limiting caffeine to earlier in the day so it’s out of your system by bedtime.Just 10 to 20 minutes of napping during the day can help you feel more rested. A good power nap can improve your creativity and memory, too! But avoid snoozing any longer than 20 minutes, which could steal time from your nighttime slumber cycles.Increasing your exposure to natural light during the day promotes a healthy balance of that sleep hormone, melatonin. Sunlight tells those ancient receptors inside your body that it’s time to get going with the hunting and foraging and all things not sleep.This helps reinforce the message to do the opposite when it’s dark.Magnesium and B vitamins are two nutrients that may help enhance your sleep. Foods high in magnesium include: Also eat foods like these, which are rich in B vitamins: Valerian, tryptophan, and melatonin are three supplements used to promote sleep, but their effectiveness varies. Research shows that melatonin can help you fall asleep a bit faster and keep you slumbering longer, but results can vary a lot based on which product you buy. Abad VC, et al. (2018). Insomnia in elderly patients: Recommendations for pharmacological management. DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0569-8Check with your doctor before taking any supplement, to make sure it’s safe for you.If designated worry time earlier in the day didn’t fully do the trick, spend some extra time writing down your anxieties. Loose-leaf paper works, but if you scrawl your sorrows in a journal or notebook, you can literally close the book on your worries (at least until morning).Don’t jump straight from your last activity of the day into bed. Give your mind and body a chance to prep for sleep.You’ve probably heard that meditation seems to be good for us in just about every possible way. One meta-analysis found that people who practiced meditation saw improvements in total sleep time and sleep quality.Other relaxation strategies — like yoga, deep breathing, and progressive relaxation — are also effective tools for promoting good sleep.A big meal before bedtime could leave you too stuffed to sleep. Just getting horizontal can create that burny feeling in your throat. Everything slows down during the night, too, and it’s probably not great to have all that food sitting around in your digestive system.Booze might seem like an obvious choice for calming down pre-bedtime, but it can actually disrupt sleep cycles later in the night. You don’t have to give up the good stuff completely. Just drink it with dinner (around 6 o’clock) and skip the nightcap.Don’t work, watch super-stimulating TV shows or movies, read complex material, or think too hard — about anything — before bedtime. See above about getting away from your screens. Working out your brain keeps your body awake.Hey, anything for a good night’s rest. Getting your “O” face on pre-bedtime can help you fall asleep. Why not?Yes, it sucks when it’s 2 a.m. and you still don’t feel tired despite knowing you need rest. But climbing into bed when you don’t feel ready for sleep is setting yourself up for failure.Instead, engage in relaxing activities (like gentle yoga and meditation or listening to soothing music) until you get the strong urge to snooze. If sleep hasn’t come within 20 minutes, get back out of bed and try relaxing activities again until you’re sleepy enough to give it another go.This soothing tea has a calming effect on your brain. A cup or two could get you into a better headspace for sleep.Stepping from warm water into that pre-cooled bedroom will cause your body temperature to drop slightly. This temperature change triggers sleepy feelings by slowing down your body’s metabolic activity.Science doesn’t necessarily back the idea that milk facilitates snoozing. But if you’ve been in the habit of milk before bed since childhood, the suggestion of sleepiness from a cup of warm milk might be strong enough to get you there.You might wonder if this advice contradicts the “no exercise before bed” warning. But some easy leg lifts, squats, or your leg exercise of choice can help divert blood flow to your legs and away from your brain. This can quiet your mind, making it easier to slip into dreamland.It might not work for everybody, but focusing on one thing can help settle down your brain, making sleep easier. Not a fan of these wooly animals? Focusing on your breath (in, out, in, out) is also an effective way to chill out.Imagine yourself drifting into a blissful slumber while practicing deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation: Starting at one end of your body and working your way up or down, clench and then release each section of muscles for instant all-over relaxation.Tried everything and still can’t sleep? It may be time to reach out to the pros for advice.Cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia is a pretty common technique. Also called CBT-I, this therapy typically involves self-monitoring, mental strategies (like developing positive thoughts about sleep), and creating an environment that promotes sleep.Research has shown that it can improve the quality of sleep. Morgan K, et al. (2012). Self-help treatment for insomnia symptoms associated with chronic conditions in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04175.xLearn these strategies with the help of a therapist or with online guidance or books — both are equally effective ways of implementing CBT-I. Not into seeing a therapist? Use a digital program like Sleepio to help you learn and implement CBT practices from the comfort of your home.If you’ve tried everything and sleep remains elusive, it might be time to consult a healthcare professional. A doctor can help rule out any sleep disorders and identify health issues, treatments, or medications that might be getting in the way of a good night’s rest.What definitely won’t do you any good in the getting-to-sleep department: judgments (“I should be asleep”) and catastrophic thinking (“If I don’t get to sleep, I’ll mess up that presentation tomorrow, lose my job, and die tired and alone”). Make the night easier by accepting insomnia for what it is. Let go of judgments and be gentle with yourself. The silver lining? You just might get to see a glorious sunrise. Last medically reviewed on  May 7, 2019If you have a fondness for epic cinematic moods and need to set an atmosphere of concentration for 1 or 2 hours, this playlist is for you. Birth control IUDs are safe and effective, but there can be side effects. Learn if an IUD is right for you. Can’t wake up in the morning and smashing that snooze? The snooze button may be making it harder to wake up.Late-night snack attacks can lead to indigestion, belly bloat, and zero shut-eye. Follow these guidelines for the best foods for sleep.OUR BRANDSSleeping difficulty is when you have trouble sleeping at night. It may be hard for you to fall asleep, or you may wake up several times throughout the night.Sleep difficulty may affect your physical and mental health. Lack of sleep may also cause you to have frequent headaches or trouble concentrating.Most people experience difficulty sleeping at some point in their lives. Some people may feel refreshed after only six or seven hours of sleep. However, most adults need about eight hours of sleep every night to feel rested. Signs of sleeping difficulty may include an inability to focus during the day, frequent headaches, irritability, daytime fatigue, waking up too early, waking up throughout the night, or taking several hours to fall asleep.You may also experience low energy during the day or have noticeably dark circles under your eyes.There are many possible reasons for sleeplessness, including your sleeping habits, lifestyle choices, and medical conditions. Some causes are minor and may improve with self-care, while others may require you to seek medical attention.Causes of sleeplessness may include aging, too much stimulation before bedtime (such as watching television, playing video games, or exercising), consuming too much caffeine, noise disturbances, an uncomfortable bedroom, or a feeling of excitement. Sleeping too much during the day, lack of exposure to sunlight, frequent urination, physical pain, jet lag, and some prescription medications may also lead to difficulty sleeping. For many people, stress, worry, depression, or work schedules may also affect their sleep. For others, sleep issues are due to a sleep disorder such as insomnia, sleep apnea, and restless legs syndrome.Sleeplessness may also occur in infants. It’s normal for newborns to wake up several times throughout the night. However, most infants will start to sleep through the night after they’re 6 months old.If an older infant is showing signs of sleeplessness, it may be a sign that they’re teething, sick, hungry, or bothered by gas or digestive problems.Obstructive sleep apnea is a condition where there’s a blockage in the upper airways. This results in pauses in breathing throughout the night that may cause you to abruptly wake up, often with a choking sound. Snoring commonly occurs in this disorder.Restless legs syndrome may also trigger sleeping difficulty. This condition causes uncomfortable sensations in your legs, such as tingling or aching. These sensations give you the urge to make your legs move frequently, including while resting, which can interrupt your sleep.Delayed sleep phase disorder is another condition that can affect sleep. This condition causes a delay in the 24-hour cycle of sleep and wakefulness. You may not feel sleepy or fall asleep until the middle of the night. This sleep cycle makes it harder for you to wake up in the early morning and leads to daytime fatigue.You should see a doctor if your sleeping difficulties are ongoing and affecting your quality of life. They’ll attempt to find the underlying cause of your sleeplessness by conducting a physical examination and asking questions about your sleep patterns. You can connect to a physician in your area using the Healthline FindCare tool.During your appointment, be sure to tell your doctor about any prescription medications, over-the-counter products, and herbal supplements that you take. Some medications and supplements cause overstimulation and can disrupt your sleep if taken too close to bedtime.You should also mention if you’re experiencing other problems, such as depression, anxiety, or chronic pain. These factors may also affect your ability to sleep.To determine the cause of sleeplessness, your doctor may recommend that you keep a sleep diary.You should record your entire day’s activities and sleep habits, such as the time you went to bed, the time you woke up, the amount of food and the drinks you consumed, your mood, any medications you took, your activity level, and your quality of sleep.Keeping a sleep record helps your doctor pinpoint habits that may trigger sleep issues.If your doctor suspects you have sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, or another sleep disorder, they may schedule a sleep study test. For this test, you’ll spend the night in a hospital or sleep center. A sleep specialist will observe you throughout the night. Your blood pressure, heart rate, breathing, oxygen level, and brain waves will be monitored for any signs of a sleep disorder.Treatment for your sleeplessness depends on its cause. In some cases, at-home remedies or simple lifestyle changes can improve the quality of your sleep. You may want to avoid caffeine and alcohol for at least a few or more hours before bed.Limit any daytime napping to 30 minutes or none at all if possible. Keep your bedroom dark and cool. Avoid stimulating activities before bedtime, and allow seven to eight hours for sleep each night. Listening to soothing music and taking a hot bath before bedtime may also help. Keep a regular sleep schedule.You may also purchase some sleep aids without a prescription. However, sleep aids can cause daytime drowsiness if you don’t get a full seven or eight hours of sleep. Also, don’t use these products on a daily basis, as it may lead to a dependency.Remember to always read the directions closely and take the medication as directed. If a medical condition or sleep disorder is causing your problems, you’ll need treatment for the underlying condition.For example, if your sleep is affected by anxiety disorder or depression, your doctor may prescribe an anti-anxiety or antidepressant medication to help you cope with worry, stress, and feelings of hopelessness.If left untreated, chronic sleep problems can greatly affect your qualify of life. Your reaction time when driving may decrease, which increases your risk of an accident.Poor sleep quality may also reduce your performance levels on the job or at school. It may also weaken your immune system, resulting in more colds and illnesses. Talk to your doctor if your sleeping problems become frequent. Your doctor can help recommend various treatment methods. Last medically reviewed on  July 15, 2019Being unable to sleep is incredibly frustrating, and it can make you feel miserable the next day. Here are 20 simple tips to fall asleep as fast as…This article lists 17 evidence-based tips to sleep better at night. Getting good sleep is very important for optimal health.If you live with insomnia, you may want to learn how cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help. Learn how CBT works for insomnia. Insomnia makes it difficult for you to fall asleep, stay asleep, or both. Get information on risk factors, symptoms, tests, treatments, and home…Falling asleep may be easy some nights and elusive on others. We'll discuss the average time it takes a person to fall asleep.Here's what you should know about how long melatonin lasts in your body after usage and how that can affect your daytime and nighttime routines.Researchers say a lack of sleep may prevent the heart from getting the rest it needs.OUR BRANDSWill you help us give the gift of hope?Our mission is to provide empowering, evidence-based mental health content you can use to help yourself and your loved ones.sleepA sleep disorder is a condition that frequently impacts your ability to get enough quality sleep. Many of us occasionally experience difficulties sleeping. Usually it’s due to stress, travel, illness, or other temporary interruptions to your normal routine. However, if you regularly have problems getting to sleep at night, wake up feeling exhausted, or feel sleepy during the day, you may be suffering from a sleep disorder.Sleep disorders cause more than just daytime sleepiness. They can take a serious toll on your mental and physical health, including your mood, energy, and ability to handle stress. Ignoring sleep problems and disorders can lead to weight gain, car accidents, impaired job performance, memory problems, and strained relationships. If you want to feel your best, stay healthy, and perform up to your potential, quality sleep is a necessity, not a luxury.Frequently having trouble sleeping can be a frustrating and debilitating experience. You sleep badly at night, which leaves you feeling dead-tired in the morning and whatever energy you have quickly drains throughout the day. But then, no matter how exhausted you feel at night, you still have trouble sleeping. And so the cycle begins again. But you don’t have to live with a sleeping problem. There are many things you can do to identify the underlying causes of your sleep disorder and improve your sleep, health, and quality of life.Everyone experiences occasional sleeping problems, so how can you tell whether your difficulty is just a minor, passing annoyance or a sign of a more serious sleep disorder or underlying medical condition?Start by scrutinizing your symptoms, looking especially for the telltale daytime signs of sleep deprivation.Do you:If you are experiencing any of the above symptoms on a regular basis, you may be dealing with a sleep disorder. The more you answered “yes”, the more likely it is that you have a sleep disorder.Insomnia, the inability to get to sleep or sleep well at night, can be caused by stress, jet lag, a health condition, the medications you take, or even the amount of coffee you drink. Insomnia can also be caused by other sleep disorders or mood disorders such as anxiety and depression.Whatever the cause of your insomnia, improving your sleep hygiene, revising your daytime habits, and learning to relax will help cure most cases of insomnia without relying on sleep specialists or turning to prescription or over-the-counter sleeping pills.Sleep apnea is a common (and treatable) sleep disorder in which your breathing temporarily stops during sleep, awakening you frequently. If you have sleep apnea you may not remember these awakenings, but you’ll likely feel exhausted during the day, irritable and depressed, or see a decrease in your productivity. Sleep apnea is a serious and potentially life-threatening sleep disorder, so see a doctor right away and learn how to help yourself.Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a sleep disorder that causes an almost irresistible urge to move your legs (or arms) at night. The urge to move occurs when you’re resting or lying down and is usually due to uncomfortable, tingly, aching, or creeping sensations. There are plenty of ways to help manage and relieve symptoms, though, including self-help remedies you can use at home.Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder that involves excessive, uncontrollable daytime sleepiness. It is caused by a dysfunction of the brain mechanism that controls sleeping and waking. If you have narcolepsy, you may have “sleep attacks” in the middle of talking, working, or even driving. Although no cure yet exists, a combination of treatments can help control symptoms and enable you to enjoy many normal activities.We all have an internal biological clock that regulates our 24-hour sleep-wake cycle, also known as our circadian rhythms. Light is the primary cue that influences circadian rhythms. At night, when there is less light, your brain triggers the release of melatonin, a hormone that makes you sleepy. When the sun comes up in the morning, the brain tells the body that it’s time to wake up.When your circadian rhythms are disrupted or thrown off, you may feel groggy, disoriented, and sleepy at inconvenient times. Circadian rhythms have been linked to a variety of sleeping problems and sleep disorders, as well as depression, bipolar disorder, and seasonal affective disorder (the winter blues).Shift work sleep disorder occurs when your work schedule and your biological clock are out of sync. In our 24-hour society, many people have to work night shifts, early morning shifts, or rotating shifts. These schedules force you to work when your body is telling you to go to sleep, and sleep when your body is signaling you to wake.While some people adjust better than others to the demands of shift work, most shift workers get less quality sleep than their daytime counterparts. As a result of sleep deprivation, you may struggle with sleepiness and mental lethargy on the job. This cuts into your productivity and puts you at risk of injury.To reduce the impact of shift work on your sleep:Delayed sleep phase disorder is a condition where your biological clock is significantly delayed. As a result, you go to sleep and wake up much later than other people. This is more than just a preference for staying up late or being a night owl, but rather a disorder that makes it difficult for you to keep normal hours—to make it to morning classes, get the kids to school on time, or keep a 9-to-5 job.Jet lag is a temporary disruption in circadian rhythms that occurs when you travel across time zones. Symptoms include daytime sleepiness, fatigue, headaches, stomach problems, and insomnia. Symptoms are more pronounced the longer the flight and flying east tends to cause worse jet lag than flying west.In general, it usually takes one day per time zone crossed to adjust to the local time. So, if you flew from Los Angeles to New York, crossing three time zones, your jet lag should be gone within three days.The first step to overcoming a sleep disorder or problem is identifying and carefully tracking your symptoms and sleep patterns.A sleep diary can pinpoint day and nighttime habits that may contribute to your problems at night. Keeping a record of your sleep patterns and problems will also prove helpful if you eventually need to see a sleep doctor.Your sleep diary should include:The details can be important, revealing how certain behaviors can be ruining your chance for a good night’s sleep. After keeping the diary for a week, for example, you might notice that when you have more than one glass of wine in the evening, you wake up during the night.Download or print HelpGuide’s sleep diary (PDF).While some sleep disorders may require a visit to the doctor, you can improve many sleeping problems on your own.Improve your daytime habits. Regardless of your sleep problems, sticking to a consistent sleep schedule, getting regular exercise, limiting your intake of caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine, and managing stress will translate into better sleep over the long term.Develop a relaxing bedtime routine to prepare your mind and body for sleep. Make sure your bedroom is quiet, dark, and cool, avoid heavy meals and too many fluids late at night, take a warm bath, read, or listen to soothing music to unwind, and turn off screens at least one hour before bedtime.Get back to sleep when you wake up at night. Whether you have a sleep disorder or not, it’s normal to wake briefly during the night. If you’re having trouble getting back to sleep, try focusing on your breathing, meditating, or practicing another relaxation technique. Make a note of anything that’s worrying you and resolve to postpone worrying about it until the next day when it will be easier to resolve.If you’ve tried a variety of self-help remedies without success, schedule an appointment with a sleep specialist or ask your family doctor for a referral to a sleep clinic, especially if:Provide your doctor with as much supporting information as possible, including information from your sleep diary.A specialist will observe your sleep patterns, brain waves, heart rate, rapid eye movements and more using monitoring devices attached to your body. While sleeping with a bunch of wires attached to you might seem difficult, most patients find they get used to it quickly.The sleep specialist will then design a treatment program if necessary. A sleep center can also provide you with equipment to monitor your activities (awake and asleep) at home.Authors: Melinda Smith, M.A., Lawrence Robinson, and Robert Segal, M.A.One in four people will struggle with mental health at some point in their lives. And with the coronavirus pandemic and troubled economy, many are in crisis right now. More than ever, people need a trustworthy place to turn to for guidance and hope. That is our mission at HelpGuide. Our free online resources ensure that everyone can get the help they need when they need it—no matter what health insurance they have, where they live, or what they can afford. But as a nonprofit that doesn’t run ads or accept corporate sponsorships, we need your help. If you have already contributed, thank you. If you haven’t, please consider helping us reach those who need it: Donate today from as little as $3.Last updated: October 2020Improving Sleep – A guide to a good night’s rest. (Harvard Medical School Special Health Report)An Overview of Sleep Disorders – Symptoms and treatment of common sleep disorders. (Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School)Problem Sleepiness (PDF) – Including symptoms, causes, and link to common sleep disorders. (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health)Sleep Problems in Children – Common sleep issues with babies, young children, and teenagers. (University of Michigan Health System)In the U.S., use the sleep center locator to find a sleep center near you. (American Academy of Sleep Medicine)In the UK, find sleep clinics, centres, and specialists. (UK Health Centre)In Canada, find a sleep clinic or treatment provider. (Canada Sleep Society)In Australia, find a list of sleep clinics. (Sleep Disorders Australia)About UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use Monthly mental health & wellness tipsHELPGUIDEORG INTERNATIONAL is a tax-exempt 501(c)3 organization (ID #45-4510670). Our content does not constitute a medical or psychological consultation. See a certified medical or mental health professional for diagnosis. Learn more.© 1999-2021 HelpGuide.org. All rights reserved.Sleeping difficulty is when you have trouble sleeping at night. It may be hard for you to fall asleep, or you may wake up several times throughout the night.Sleep difficulty may affect your physical and mental health. Lack of sleep may also cause you to have frequent headaches or trouble concentrating.Most people experience difficulty sleeping at some point in their lives. Some people may feel refreshed after only six or seven hours of sleep. However, most adults need about eight hours of sleep every night to feel rested. Signs of sleeping difficulty may include an inability to focus during the day, frequent headaches, irritability, daytime fatigue, waking up too early, waking up throughout the night, or taking several hours to fall asleep.You may also experience low energy during the day or have noticeably dark circles under your eyes.There are many possible reasons for sleeplessness, including your sleeping habits, lifestyle choices, and medical conditions. Some causes are minor and may improve with self-care, while others may require you to seek medical attention.Causes of sleeplessness may include aging, too much stimulation before bedtime (such as watching television, playing video games, or exercising), consuming too much caffeine, noise disturbances, an uncomfortable bedroom, or a feeling of excitement. Sleeping too much during the day, lack of exposure to sunlight, frequent urination, physical pain, jet lag, and some prescription medications may also lead to difficulty sleeping. For many people, stress, worry, depression, or work schedules may also affect their sleep. For others, sleep issues are due to a sleep disorder such as insomnia, sleep apnea, and restless legs syndrome.Sleeplessness may also occur in infants. It’s normal for newborns to wake up several times throughout the night. However, most infants will start to sleep through the night after they’re 6 months old.If an older infant is showing signs of sleeplessness, it may be a sign that they’re teething, sick, hungry, or bothered by gas or digestive problems.Obstructive sleep apnea is a condition where there’s a blockage in the upper airways. This results in pauses in breathing throughout the night that may cause you to abruptly wake up, often with a choking sound. Snoring commonly occurs in this disorder.Restless legs syndrome may also trigger sleeping difficulty. This condition causes uncomfortable sensations in your legs, such as tingling or aching. These sensations give you the urge to make your legs move frequently, including while resting, which can interrupt your sleep.Delayed sleep phase disorder is another condition that can affect sleep. This condition causes a delay in the 24-hour cycle of sleep and wakefulness. You may not feel sleepy or fall asleep until the middle of the night. This sleep cycle makes it harder for you to wake up in the early morning and leads to daytime fatigue.You should see a doctor if your sleeping difficulties are ongoing and affecting your quality of life. They’ll attempt to find the underlying cause of your sleeplessness by conducting a physical examination and asking questions about your sleep patterns. You can connect to a physician in your area using the Healthline FindCare tool.During your appointment, be sure to tell your doctor about any prescription medications, over-the-counter products, and herbal supplements that you take. Some medications and supplements cause overstimulation and can disrupt your sleep if taken too close to bedtime.You should also mention if you’re experiencing other problems, such as depression, anxiety, or chronic pain. These factors may also affect your ability to sleep.To determine the cause of sleeplessness, your doctor may recommend that you keep a sleep diary.You should record your entire day’s activities and sleep habits, such as the time you went to bed, the time you woke up, the amount of food and the drinks you consumed, your mood, any medications you took, your activity level, and your quality of sleep.Keeping a sleep record helps your doctor pinpoint habits that may trigger sleep issues.If your doctor suspects you have sleep apnea, restless legs syndrome, or another sleep disorder, they may schedule a sleep study test. For this test, you’ll spend the night in a hospital or sleep center. A sleep specialist will observe you throughout the night. Your blood pressure, heart rate, breathing, oxygen level, and brain waves will be monitored for any signs of a sleep disorder.Treatment for your sleeplessness depends on its cause. In some cases, at-home remedies or simple lifestyle changes can improve the quality of your sleep. You may want to avoid caffeine and alcohol for at least a few or more hours before bed.Limit any daytime napping to 30 minutes or none at all if possible. Keep your bedroom dark and cool. Avoid stimulating activities before bedtime, and allow seven to eight hours for sleep each night. Listening to soothing music and taking a hot bath before bedtime may also help. Keep a regular sleep schedule.You may also purchase some sleep aids without a prescription. However, sleep aids can cause daytime drowsiness if you don’t get a full seven or eight hours of sleep. Also, don’t use these products on a daily basis, as it may lead to a dependency.Remember to always read the directions closely and take the medication as directed. If a medical condition or sleep disorder is causing your problems, you’ll need treatment for the underlying condition.For example, if your sleep is affected by anxiety disorder or depression, your doctor may prescribe an anti-anxiety or antidepressant medication to help you cope with worry, stress, and feelings of hopelessness.If left untreated, chronic sleep problems can greatly affect your qualify of life. Your reaction time when driving may decrease, which increases your risk of an accident.Poor sleep quality may also reduce your performance levels on the job or at school. It may also weaken your immune system, resulting in more colds and illnesses. Talk to your doctor if your sleeping problems become frequent. Your doctor can help recommend various treatment methods. Last medically reviewed on  July 15, 2019Being unable to sleep is incredibly frustrating, and it can make you feel miserable the next day. Here are 20 simple tips to fall asleep as fast as…This article lists 17 evidence-based tips to sleep better at night. Getting good sleep is very important for optimal health.If you live with insomnia, you may want to learn how cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can help. Learn how CBT works for insomnia. Insomnia makes it difficult for you to fall asleep, stay asleep, or both. Get information on risk factors, symptoms, tests, treatments, and home…Falling asleep may be easy some nights and elusive on others. We'll discuss the average time it takes a person to fall asleep.Here's what you should know about how long melatonin lasts in your body after usage and how that can affect your daytime and nighttime routines.Researchers say a lack of sleep may prevent the heart from getting the rest it needs.OUR BRANDSIt’s, oh, I don’t know, 3 o’clock in the freaking morning, and I’m lying in bed, flipping my pillow around in frustration. I’m trying to stay hopeful that I can catch a few hours of shut-eye before I have to get up.But I’ve been through this enough times to know the beast of insomnia can’t always be tamed.I’m not alone. Insomnia is incredibly common in the United States. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, about 30 percent of American adults have some type of insomnia, and it’s more common in women than in men.For anyone out there who has developed an expertise in fruitlessly counting sheep, we’ve rounded up a few strategies for finally catching those long-lost Zzz’s. And if you’re reading this at 3 a.m. because your mind won’t stop racing, don’t worry.We have tips for what you can do right now to improve your chances of getting (at least some) sleep.Insomnia is the inability to fall asleep, stay asleep, or get the amount of sleep you need to wake up feeling rested. Insomnia can be acute (lasting one to several nights) or chronic (occurring three times a week for at least three months). Walia HK, et al. Overview of common sleep disorders and intersection with dermatologic conditions. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4881480/ Its symptoms include: The causes of insomnia range from a variety of underlying medical or psychiatric conditions to medication side effects to simple lifestyle factors. So a little detective work is your first step. Try some of the tips below to rule out lifestyle factors that may be behind your sleeplessness.Insomnia is no joke. It can reduce your life expectancy and increase your risk of heart problems, compromised immunity, obesity, diabetes, seizures, and asthma. It’s probably well worth the effort to make some changes now to improve your sleep.One possible reason you’re not getting enough rest is that your bedroom isn’t optimally set up for sleep. The ideal climate is cool, dark, and comfortable.Uncomfortable bedding can lead to poorer sleep quality. A comfortable mattress increases your chances of a satisfying snooze. Check out the National Sleep Foundation’s tips on choosing the right pillow.Exposure to bright lights just before bed might negatively affect your chance of getting quality — and quantity — sleep. Light suppresses the secretion of melatonin, the hormone that influences your circadian rhythms and tells your body it’s night-night time. Assuming you don’t want to sit in the dark for hours, find the happy medium by dimming the lights as bedtime draws near.Also consider changing your light bulbs to ones with a “color temperature” of less than 3,000 kelvins. These soft/warm varieties can reduce the light’s effects on your nervous system.The artificial (or “blue”) light emitted by screens can disrupt your body’s preparations for sleep by stimulating daytime hormones. Reduce your exposure by turning off TVs, phones, and computers at least an hour before bedtime.If you can’t get away from blue lights before bedtime, consider making a small investment in blue-light-blocking glasses.Can’t sleep but don’t want to give up late-night TV? At least dim the screen’s brightness, either manually or with the help of automated programs.Some outside noises — like a busy street or a neighbor’s barking dog — are beyond your control. Cover them up with the sound of a bedside fan, a white noise machine, or other sounds that help with sleep.A dark, cool bedroom environment helps to promote restful sleep. Program the thermostat so that your bedroom’s temperature is between 60 and 75°F. Experiment to find out what temperature works best for you.Use heavy curtains, blackout shades, or an eye mask to block lights. Charge your phone and laptop outside the bedroom — even the tiny bit of light from a charging device can disrupt sleep.Beds should be used only for sleep and sex — nothing else. Bringing work into the bedroom is a surefire way to discourage quality sleep.Prime your body with the same sleep-promoting activities each day. Eventually, they’ll become habit, and so will awesomely restful sleep.Try to stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends. If your alarm goes off at 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, set it for the same time on Saturday and Sunday. The early alarm might make you groan, but you’ll sleep better for it.Every day, spend about 15 minutes addressing problems, so they don’t sneak up when your head hits the pillow. Schedule tasks and resolutions in your calendar. If a particular stressor is keeping you up at night but has a clear end date, this can help get it off your nighttime mind.Record how much and when you sleep, your fatigue levels throughout the day, and any other symptoms you have. Sleep-tracking apps like SleepScore and Sleep Cycle can help with your recording efforts.Sleep tracking serves two purposes. It can identify things you do that help or hurt your chances of a good night’s rest, and it’s a useful tool for a doctor or therapist, should you decide to see one.A healthy body equates to healthier sleep. Take good care of yourself overall with a balanced diet, exercise, and good stress relief, and you’ll have fewer worries come bedtime.Need another reason to quit? Smokers commonly exhibit symptoms of insomnia — possibly because their bodies go into nicotine withdrawal during the night. Jaehne A, et al. How smoking affects sleep: A polysomnographical analysis. DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.06.026Moderate aerobic activity can improve both sleep quality and quantity. For best results, exercise at least three hours before bed so your body has enough time to wind down before you hit the sack.It’s tempting to reach for coffee when you’re tired after a poor night’s sleep, but drinking caffeine can make it harder for you to fall asleep at night, creating a vicious cycle.Research has shown that people who consume more caffeine spend less time sleeping and don’t sleep as well as those who avoid overdoing caffeine [Watson EJ, et al. (2016). Caffeine consumption and sleep quality in Australian adults. DOI: 10.3390/nu8080479].Can’t quit cold turkey? Try limiting caffeine to earlier in the day so it’s out of your system by bedtime.Just 10 to 20 minutes of napping during the day can help you feel more rested. A good power nap can improve your creativity and memory, too! But avoid snoozing any longer than 20 minutes, which could steal time from your nighttime slumber cycles.Increasing your exposure to natural light during the day promotes a healthy balance of that sleep hormone, melatonin. Sunlight tells those ancient receptors inside your body that it’s time to get going with the hunting and foraging and all things not sleep.This helps reinforce the message to do the opposite when it’s dark.Magnesium and B vitamins are two nutrients that may help enhance your sleep. Foods high in magnesium include: Also eat foods like these, which are rich in B vitamins: Valerian, tryptophan, and melatonin are three supplements used to promote sleep, but their effectiveness varies. Research shows that melatonin can help you fall asleep a bit faster and keep you slumbering longer, but results can vary a lot based on which product you buy. Abad VC, et al. (2018). Insomnia in elderly patients: Recommendations for pharmacological management. DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0569-8Check with your doctor before taking any supplement, to make sure it’s safe for you.If designated worry time earlier in the day didn’t fully do the trick, spend some extra time writing down your anxieties. Loose-leaf paper works, but if you scrawl your sorrows in a journal or notebook, you can literally close the book on your worries (at least until morning).Don’t jump straight from your last activity of the day into bed. Give your mind and body a chance to prep for sleep.You’ve probably heard that meditation seems to be good for us in just about every possible way. One meta-analysis found that people who practiced meditation saw improvements in total sleep time and sleep quality.Other relaxation strategies — like yoga, deep breathing, and progressive relaxation — are also effective tools for promoting good sleep.A big meal before bedtime could leave you too stuffed to sleep. Just getting horizontal can create that burny feeling in your throat. Everything slows down during the night, too, and it’s probably not great to have all that food sitting around in your digestive system.Booze might seem like an obvious choice for calming down pre-bedtime, but it can actually disrupt sleep cycles later in the night. You don’t have to give up the good stuff completely. Just drink it with dinner (around 6 o’clock) and skip the nightcap.Don’t work, watch super-stimulating TV shows or movies, read complex material, or think too hard — about anything — before bedtime. See above about getting away from your screens. Working out your brain keeps your body awake.Hey, anything for a good night’s rest. Getting your “O” face on pre-bedtime can help you fall asleep. Why not?Yes, it sucks when it’s 2 a.m. and you still don’t feel tired despite knowing you need rest. But climbing into bed when you don’t feel ready for sleep is setting yourself up for failure.Instead, engage in relaxing activities (like gentle yoga and meditation or listening to soothing music) until you get the strong urge to snooze. If sleep hasn’t come within 20 minutes, get back out of bed and try relaxing activities again until you’re sleepy enough to give it another go.This soothing tea has a calming effect on your brain. A cup or two could get you into a better headspace for sleep.Stepping from warm water into that pre-cooled bedroom will cause your body temperature to drop slightly. This temperature change triggers sleepy feelings by slowing down your body’s metabolic activity.Science doesn’t necessarily back the idea that milk facilitates snoozing. But if you’ve been in the habit of milk before bed since childhood, the suggestion of sleepiness from a cup of warm milk might be strong enough to get you there.You might wonder if this advice contradicts the “no exercise before bed” warning. But some easy leg lifts, squats, or your leg exercise of choice can help divert blood flow to your legs and away from your brain. This can quiet your mind, making it easier to slip into dreamland.It might not work for everybody, but focusing on one thing can help settle down your brain, making sleep easier. Not a fan of these wooly animals? Focusing on your breath (in, out, in, out) is also an effective way to chill out.Imagine yourself drifting into a blissful slumber while practicing deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation: Starting at one end of your body and working your way up or down, clench and then release each section of muscles for instant all-over relaxation.Tried everything and still can’t sleep? It may be time to reach out to the pros for advice.Cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia is a pretty common technique. Also called CBT-I, this therapy typically involves self-monitoring, mental strategies (like developing positive thoughts about sleep), and creating an environment that promotes sleep.Research has shown that it can improve the quality of sleep. Morgan K, et al. (2012). Self-help treatment for insomnia symptoms associated with chronic conditions in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04175.xLearn these strategies with the help of a therapist or with online guidance or books — both are equally effective ways of implementing CBT-I. Not into seeing a therapist? Use a digital program like Sleepio to help you learn and implement CBT practices from the comfort of your home.If you’ve tried everything and sleep remains elusive, it might be time to consult a healthcare professional. A doctor can help rule out any sleep disorders and identify health issues, treatments, or medications that might be getting in the way of a good night’s rest.What definitely won’t do you any good in the getting-to-sleep department: judgments (“I should be asleep”) and catastrophic thinking (“If I don’t get to sleep, I’ll mess up that presentation tomorrow, lose my job, and die tired and alone”). Make the night easier by accepting insomnia for what it is. Let go of judgments and be gentle with yourself. The silver lining? You just might get to see a glorious sunrise. Last medically reviewed on  May 7, 2019If you have a fondness for epic cinematic moods and need to set an atmosphere of concentration for 1 or 2 hours, this playlist is for you. Birth control IUDs are safe and effective, but there can be side effects. Learn if an IUD is right for you. Can’t wake up in the morning and smashing that snooze? The snooze button may be making it harder to wake up.Late-night snack attacks can lead to indigestion, belly bloat, and zero shut-eye. Follow these guidelines for the best foods for sleep.OUR BRANDSI go to bed on time but sometimes I lie there for a while and can't fall asleep.
               What should I do? – Thomas*Changes in document.write(def_circadian_T);
               
               circadian
                rhythm mean
               it can be hard for teens to fall asleep
               sometimes.If you find yourself lying awake in bed thinking about everything from your homework
               to whether it's your turn to walk the dog in the morning, you may need a sleep reboot.
               Try this:Getting up for a short while can help if you have trouble falling asleep sometimes
               or if you occasionally wake up and can't go back to sleep. But you don't want to have
               to do it every night. If you have trouble falling asleep, it's best to train your
               body to wind down and relax with a pre-sleep routine each night. Doctors call this
               "good sleep hygiene."Good sleep hygiene includes activities
               that signal the body it's time to sleep, like going to bed at the same time each night,
               shutting down technology, and keeping your room dark. It also includes avoiding caffeine
               or other stimulants for several hours before bedtime.It can help to treat sleep like any other goal: build
               a plan that helps you focus on it and get the results you want!*Names have been changed to protect user privacy.Note: All information on TeensHealth® is for educational purposes only. For specific medical advice, diagnoses, and treatment,
                  consult your doctor.
               © 1995-document.write(KHcopyDate); The Nemours Foundation. All rights reserved.Images provided by The Nemours Foundation, iStock, Getty Images, Veer, Shutterstock,
                  and Clipart.com.If you are suffering from insomnia, there are many steps you can take to change behaviors and lifestyle to help you get to sleep. Here are some tips for beating insomnia.SOURCES:  American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Sleep Disorders Channel. Test your knowledge.  What causes them?  Learn about your options.  Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2021 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.It’s, oh, I don’t know, 3 o’clock in the freaking morning, and I’m lying in bed, flipping my pillow around in frustration. I’m trying to stay hopeful that I can catch a few hours of shut-eye before I have to get up.But I’ve been through this enough times to know the beast of insomnia can’t always be tamed.I’m not alone. Insomnia is incredibly common in the United States. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, about 30 percent of American adults have some type of insomnia, and it’s more common in women than in men.For anyone out there who has developed an expertise in fruitlessly counting sheep, we’ve rounded up a few strategies for finally catching those long-lost Zzz’s. And if you’re reading this at 3 a.m. because your mind won’t stop racing, don’t worry.We have tips for what you can do right now to improve your chances of getting (at least some) sleep.Insomnia is the inability to fall asleep, stay asleep, or get the amount of sleep you need to wake up feeling rested. Insomnia can be acute (lasting one to several nights) or chronic (occurring three times a week for at least three months). Walia HK, et al. Overview of common sleep disorders and intersection with dermatologic conditions. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4881480/ Its symptoms include: The causes of insomnia range from a variety of underlying medical or psychiatric conditions to medication side effects to simple lifestyle factors. So a little detective work is your first step. Try some of the tips below to rule out lifestyle factors that may be behind your sleeplessness.Insomnia is no joke. It can reduce your life expectancy and increase your risk of heart problems, compromised immunity, obesity, diabetes, seizures, and asthma. It’s probably well worth the effort to make some changes now to improve your sleep.One possible reason you’re not getting enough rest is that your bedroom isn’t optimally set up for sleep. The ideal climate is cool, dark, and comfortable.Uncomfortable bedding can lead to poorer sleep quality. A comfortable mattress increases your chances of a satisfying snooze. Check out the National Sleep Foundation’s tips on choosing the right pillow.Exposure to bright lights just before bed might negatively affect your chance of getting quality — and quantity — sleep. Light suppresses the secretion of melatonin, the hormone that influences your circadian rhythms and tells your body it’s night-night time. Assuming you don’t want to sit in the dark for hours, find the happy medium by dimming the lights as bedtime draws near.Also consider changing your light bulbs to ones with a “color temperature” of less than 3,000 kelvins. These soft/warm varieties can reduce the light’s effects on your nervous system.The artificial (or “blue”) light emitted by screens can disrupt your body’s preparations for sleep by stimulating daytime hormones. Reduce your exposure by turning off TVs, phones, and computers at least an hour before bedtime.If you can’t get away from blue lights before bedtime, consider making a small investment in blue-light-blocking glasses.Can’t sleep but don’t want to give up late-night TV? At least dim the screen’s brightness, either manually or with the help of automated programs.Some outside noises — like a busy street or a neighbor’s barking dog — are beyond your control. Cover them up with the sound of a bedside fan, a white noise machine, or other sounds that help with sleep.A dark, cool bedroom environment helps to promote restful sleep. Program the thermostat so that your bedroom’s temperature is between 60 and 75°F. Experiment to find out what temperature works best for you.Use heavy curtains, blackout shades, or an eye mask to block lights. Charge your phone and laptop outside the bedroom — even the tiny bit of light from a charging device can disrupt sleep.Beds should be used only for sleep and sex — nothing else. Bringing work into the bedroom is a surefire way to discourage quality sleep.Prime your body with the same sleep-promoting activities each day. Eventually, they’ll become habit, and so will awesomely restful sleep.Try to stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends. If your alarm goes off at 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, set it for the same time on Saturday and Sunday. The early alarm might make you groan, but you’ll sleep better for it.Every day, spend about 15 minutes addressing problems, so they don’t sneak up when your head hits the pillow. Schedule tasks and resolutions in your calendar. If a particular stressor is keeping you up at night but has a clear end date, this can help get it off your nighttime mind.Record how much and when you sleep, your fatigue levels throughout the day, and any other symptoms you have. Sleep-tracking apps like SleepScore and Sleep Cycle can help with your recording efforts.Sleep tracking serves two purposes. It can identify things you do that help or hurt your chances of a good night’s rest, and it’s a useful tool for a doctor or therapist, should you decide to see one.A healthy body equates to healthier sleep. Take good care of yourself overall with a balanced diet, exercise, and good stress relief, and you’ll have fewer worries come bedtime.Need another reason to quit? Smokers commonly exhibit symptoms of insomnia — possibly because their bodies go into nicotine withdrawal during the night. Jaehne A, et al. How smoking affects sleep: A polysomnographical analysis. DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.06.026Moderate aerobic activity can improve both sleep quality and quantity. For best results, exercise at least three hours before bed so your body has enough time to wind down before you hit the sack.It’s tempting to reach for coffee when you’re tired after a poor night’s sleep, but drinking caffeine can make it harder for you to fall asleep at night, creating a vicious cycle.Research has shown that people who consume more caffeine spend less time sleeping and don’t sleep as well as those who avoid overdoing caffeine [Watson EJ, et al. (2016). Caffeine consumption and sleep quality in Australian adults. DOI: 10.3390/nu8080479].Can’t quit cold turkey? Try limiting caffeine to earlier in the day so it’s out of your system by bedtime.Just 10 to 20 minutes of napping during the day can help you feel more rested. A good power nap can improve your creativity and memory, too! But avoid snoozing any longer than 20 minutes, which could steal time from your nighttime slumber cycles.Increasing your exposure to natural light during the day promotes a healthy balance of that sleep hormone, melatonin. Sunlight tells those ancient receptors inside your body that it’s time to get going with the hunting and foraging and all things not sleep.This helps reinforce the message to do the opposite when it’s dark.Magnesium and B vitamins are two nutrients that may help enhance your sleep. Foods high in magnesium include: Also eat foods like these, which are rich in B vitamins: Valerian, tryptophan, and melatonin are three supplements used to promote sleep, but their effectiveness varies. Research shows that melatonin can help you fall asleep a bit faster and keep you slumbering longer, but results can vary a lot based on which product you buy. Abad VC, et al. (2018). Insomnia in elderly patients: Recommendations for pharmacological management. DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0569-8Check with your doctor before taking any supplement, to make sure it’s safe for you.If designated worry time earlier in the day didn’t fully do the trick, spend some extra time writing down your anxieties. Loose-leaf paper works, but if you scrawl your sorrows in a journal or notebook, you can literally close the book on your worries (at least until morning).Don’t jump straight from your last activity of the day into bed. Give your mind and body a chance to prep for sleep.You’ve probably heard that meditation seems to be good for us in just about every possible way. One meta-analysis found that people who practiced meditation saw improvements in total sleep time and sleep quality.Other relaxation strategies — like yoga, deep breathing, and progressive relaxation — are also effective tools for promoting good sleep.A big meal before bedtime could leave you too stuffed to sleep. Just getting horizontal can create that burny feeling in your throat. Everything slows down during the night, too, and it’s probably not great to have all that food sitting around in your digestive system.Booze might seem like an obvious choice for calming down pre-bedtime, but it can actually disrupt sleep cycles later in the night. You don’t have to give up the good stuff completely. Just drink it with dinner (around 6 o’clock) and skip the nightcap.Don’t work, watch super-stimulating TV shows or movies, read complex material, or think too hard — about anything — before bedtime. See above about getting away from your screens. Working out your brain keeps your body awake.Hey, anything for a good night’s rest. Getting your “O” face on pre-bedtime can help you fall asleep. Why not?Yes, it sucks when it’s 2 a.m. and you still don’t feel tired despite knowing you need rest. But climbing into bed when you don’t feel ready for sleep is setting yourself up for failure.Instead, engage in relaxing activities (like gentle yoga and meditation or listening to soothing music) until you get the strong urge to snooze. If sleep hasn’t come within 20 minutes, get back out of bed and try relaxing activities again until you’re sleepy enough to give it another go.This soothing tea has a calming effect on your brain. A cup or two could get you into a better headspace for sleep.Stepping from warm water into that pre-cooled bedroom will cause your body temperature to drop slightly. This temperature change triggers sleepy feelings by slowing down your body’s metabolic activity.Science doesn’t necessarily back the idea that milk facilitates snoozing. But if you’ve been in the habit of milk before bed since childhood, the suggestion of sleepiness from a cup of warm milk might be strong enough to get you there.You might wonder if this advice contradicts the “no exercise before bed” warning. But some easy leg lifts, squats, or your leg exercise of choice can help divert blood flow to your legs and away from your brain. This can quiet your mind, making it easier to slip into dreamland.It might not work for everybody, but focusing on one thing can help settle down your brain, making sleep easier. Not a fan of these wooly animals? Focusing on your breath (in, out, in, out) is also an effective way to chill out.Imagine yourself drifting into a blissful slumber while practicing deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation: Starting at one end of your body and working your way up or down, clench and then release each section of muscles for instant all-over relaxation.Tried everything and still can’t sleep? It may be time to reach out to the pros for advice.Cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia is a pretty common technique. Also called CBT-I, this therapy typically involves self-monitoring, mental strategies (like developing positive thoughts about sleep), and creating an environment that promotes sleep.Research has shown that it can improve the quality of sleep. Morgan K, et al. (2012). Self-help treatment for insomnia symptoms associated with chronic conditions in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04175.xLearn these strategies with the help of a therapist or with online guidance or books — both are equally effective ways of implementing CBT-I. Not into seeing a therapist? Use a digital program like Sleepio to help you learn and implement CBT practices from the comfort of your home.If you’ve tried everything and sleep remains elusive, it might be time to consult a healthcare professional. A doctor can help rule out any sleep disorders and identify health issues, treatments, or medications that might be getting in the way of a good night’s rest.What definitely won’t do you any good in the getting-to-sleep department: judgments (“I should be asleep”) and catastrophic thinking (“If I don’t get to sleep, I’ll mess up that presentation tomorrow, lose my job, and die tired and alone”). Make the night easier by accepting insomnia for what it is. Let go of judgments and be gentle with yourself. The silver lining? You just might get to see a glorious sunrise. Last medically reviewed on  May 7, 2019If you have a fondness for epic cinematic moods and need to set an atmosphere of concentration for 1 or 2 hours, this playlist is for you. Birth control IUDs are safe and effective, but there can be side effects. Learn if an IUD is right for you. Can’t wake up in the morning and smashing that snooze? The snooze button may be making it harder to wake up.Late-night snack attacks can lead to indigestion, belly bloat, and zero shut-eye. Follow these guidelines for the best foods for sleep.OUR BRANDSIt’s, oh, I don’t know, 3 o’clock in the freaking morning, and I’m lying in bed, flipping my pillow around in frustration. I’m trying to stay hopeful that I can catch a few hours of shut-eye before I have to get up.But I’ve been through this enough times to know the beast of insomnia can’t always be tamed.I’m not alone. Insomnia is incredibly common in the United States. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, about 30 percent of American adults have some type of insomnia, and it’s more common in women than in men.For anyone out there who has developed an expertise in fruitlessly counting sheep, we’ve rounded up a few strategies for finally catching those long-lost Zzz’s. And if you’re reading this at 3 a.m. because your mind won’t stop racing, don’t worry.We have tips for what you can do right now to improve your chances of getting (at least some) sleep.Insomnia is the inability to fall asleep, stay asleep, or get the amount of sleep you need to wake up feeling rested. Insomnia can be acute (lasting one to several nights) or chronic (occurring three times a week for at least three months). Walia HK, et al. Overview of common sleep disorders and intersection with dermatologic conditions. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4881480/ Its symptoms include: The causes of insomnia range from a variety of underlying medical or psychiatric conditions to medication side effects to simple lifestyle factors. So a little detective work is your first step. Try some of the tips below to rule out lifestyle factors that may be behind your sleeplessness.Insomnia is no joke. It can reduce your life expectancy and increase your risk of heart problems, compromised immunity, obesity, diabetes, seizures, and asthma. It’s probably well worth the effort to make some changes now to improve your sleep.One possible reason you’re not getting enough rest is that your bedroom isn’t optimally set up for sleep. The ideal climate is cool, dark, and comfortable.Uncomfortable bedding can lead to poorer sleep quality. A comfortable mattress increases your chances of a satisfying snooze. Check out the National Sleep Foundation’s tips on choosing the right pillow.Exposure to bright lights just before bed might negatively affect your chance of getting quality — and quantity — sleep. Light suppresses the secretion of melatonin, the hormone that influences your circadian rhythms and tells your body it’s night-night time. Assuming you don’t want to sit in the dark for hours, find the happy medium by dimming the lights as bedtime draws near.Also consider changing your light bulbs to ones with a “color temperature” of less than 3,000 kelvins. These soft/warm varieties can reduce the light’s effects on your nervous system.The artificial (or “blue”) light emitted by screens can disrupt your body’s preparations for sleep by stimulating daytime hormones. Reduce your exposure by turning off TVs, phones, and computers at least an hour before bedtime.If you can’t get away from blue lights before bedtime, consider making a small investment in blue-light-blocking glasses.Can’t sleep but don’t want to give up late-night TV? At least dim the screen’s brightness, either manually or with the help of automated programs.Some outside noises — like a busy street or a neighbor’s barking dog — are beyond your control. Cover them up with the sound of a bedside fan, a white noise machine, or other sounds that help with sleep.A dark, cool bedroom environment helps to promote restful sleep. Program the thermostat so that your bedroom’s temperature is between 60 and 75°F. Experiment to find out what temperature works best for you.Use heavy curtains, blackout shades, or an eye mask to block lights. Charge your phone and laptop outside the bedroom — even the tiny bit of light from a charging device can disrupt sleep.Beds should be used only for sleep and sex — nothing else. Bringing work into the bedroom is a surefire way to discourage quality sleep.Prime your body with the same sleep-promoting activities each day. Eventually, they’ll become habit, and so will awesomely restful sleep.Try to stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends. If your alarm goes off at 6 a.m. Monday through Friday, set it for the same time on Saturday and Sunday. The early alarm might make you groan, but you’ll sleep better for it.Every day, spend about 15 minutes addressing problems, so they don’t sneak up when your head hits the pillow. Schedule tasks and resolutions in your calendar. If a particular stressor is keeping you up at night but has a clear end date, this can help get it off your nighttime mind.Record how much and when you sleep, your fatigue levels throughout the day, and any other symptoms you have. Sleep-tracking apps like SleepScore and Sleep Cycle can help with your recording efforts.Sleep tracking serves two purposes. It can identify things you do that help or hurt your chances of a good night’s rest, and it’s a useful tool for a doctor or therapist, should you decide to see one.A healthy body equates to healthier sleep. Take good care of yourself overall with a balanced diet, exercise, and good stress relief, and you’ll have fewer worries come bedtime.Need another reason to quit? Smokers commonly exhibit symptoms of insomnia — possibly because their bodies go into nicotine withdrawal during the night. Jaehne A, et al. How smoking affects sleep: A polysomnographical analysis. DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.06.026Moderate aerobic activity can improve both sleep quality and quantity. For best results, exercise at least three hours before bed so your body has enough time to wind down before you hit the sack.It’s tempting to reach for coffee when you’re tired after a poor night’s sleep, but drinking caffeine can make it harder for you to fall asleep at night, creating a vicious cycle.Research has shown that people who consume more caffeine spend less time sleeping and don’t sleep as well as those who avoid overdoing caffeine [Watson EJ, et al. (2016). Caffeine consumption and sleep quality in Australian adults. DOI: 10.3390/nu8080479].Can’t quit cold turkey? Try limiting caffeine to earlier in the day so it’s out of your system by bedtime.Just 10 to 20 minutes of napping during the day can help you feel more rested. A good power nap can improve your creativity and memory, too! But avoid snoozing any longer than 20 minutes, which could steal time from your nighttime slumber cycles.Increasing your exposure to natural light during the day promotes a healthy balance of that sleep hormone, melatonin. Sunlight tells those ancient receptors inside your body that it’s time to get going with the hunting and foraging and all things not sleep.This helps reinforce the message to do the opposite when it’s dark.Magnesium and B vitamins are two nutrients that may help enhance your sleep. Foods high in magnesium include: Also eat foods like these, which are rich in B vitamins: Valerian, tryptophan, and melatonin are three supplements used to promote sleep, but their effectiveness varies. Research shows that melatonin can help you fall asleep a bit faster and keep you slumbering longer, but results can vary a lot based on which product you buy. Abad VC, et al. (2018). Insomnia in elderly patients: Recommendations for pharmacological management. DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0569-8Check with your doctor before taking any supplement, to make sure it’s safe for you.If designated worry time earlier in the day didn’t fully do the trick, spend some extra time writing down your anxieties. Loose-leaf paper works, but if you scrawl your sorrows in a journal or notebook, you can literally close the book on your worries (at least until morning).Don’t jump straight from your last activity of the day into bed. Give your mind and body a chance to prep for sleep.You’ve probably heard that meditation seems to be good for us in just about every possible way. One meta-analysis found that people who practiced meditation saw improvements in total sleep time and sleep quality.Other relaxation strategies — like yoga, deep breathing, and progressive relaxation — are also effective tools for promoting good sleep.A big meal before bedtime could leave you too stuffed to sleep. Just getting horizontal can create that burny feeling in your throat. Everything slows down during the night, too, and it’s probably not great to have all that food sitting around in your digestive system.Booze might seem like an obvious choice for calming down pre-bedtime, but it can actually disrupt sleep cycles later in the night. You don’t have to give up the good stuff completely. Just drink it with dinner (around 6 o’clock) and skip the nightcap.Don’t work, watch super-stimulating TV shows or movies, read complex material, or think too hard — about anything — before bedtime. See above about getting away from your screens. Working out your brain keeps your body awake.Hey, anything for a good night’s rest. Getting your “O” face on pre-bedtime can help you fall asleep. Why not?Yes, it sucks when it’s 2 a.m. and you still don’t feel tired despite knowing you need rest. But climbing into bed when you don’t feel ready for sleep is setting yourself up for failure.Instead, engage in relaxing activities (like gentle yoga and meditation or listening to soothing music) until you get the strong urge to snooze. If sleep hasn’t come within 20 minutes, get back out of bed and try relaxing activities again until you’re sleepy enough to give it another go.This soothing tea has a calming effect on your brain. A cup or two could get you into a better headspace for sleep.Stepping from warm water into that pre-cooled bedroom will cause your body temperature to drop slightly. This temperature change triggers sleepy feelings by slowing down your body’s metabolic activity.Science doesn’t necessarily back the idea that milk facilitates snoozing. But if you’ve been in the habit of milk before bed since childhood, the suggestion of sleepiness from a cup of warm milk might be strong enough to get you there.You might wonder if this advice contradicts the “no exercise before bed” warning. But some easy leg lifts, squats, or your leg exercise of choice can help divert blood flow to your legs and away from your brain. This can quiet your mind, making it easier to slip into dreamland.It might not work for everybody, but focusing on one thing can help settle down your brain, making sleep easier. Not a fan of these wooly animals? Focusing on your breath (in, out, in, out) is also an effective way to chill out.Imagine yourself drifting into a blissful slumber while practicing deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation: Starting at one end of your body and working your way up or down, clench and then release each section of muscles for instant all-over relaxation.Tried everything and still can’t sleep? It may be time to reach out to the pros for advice.Cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia is a pretty common technique. Also called CBT-I, this therapy typically involves self-monitoring, mental strategies (like developing positive thoughts about sleep), and creating an environment that promotes sleep.Research has shown that it can improve the quality of sleep. Morgan K, et al. (2012). Self-help treatment for insomnia symptoms associated with chronic conditions in older adults: A randomized controlled trial. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04175.xLearn these strategies with the help of a therapist or with online guidance or books — both are equally effective ways of implementing CBT-I. Not into seeing a therapist? Use a digital program like Sleepio to help you learn and implement CBT practices from the comfort of your home.If you’ve tried everything and sleep remains elusive, it might be time to consult a healthcare professional. A doctor can help rule out any sleep disorders and identify health issues, treatments, or medications that might be getting in the way of a good night’s rest.What definitely won’t do you any good in the getting-to-sleep department: judgments (“I should be asleep”) and catastrophic thinking (“If I don’t get to sleep, I’ll mess up that presentation tomorrow, lose my job, and die tired and alone”). Make the night easier by accepting insomnia for what it is. Let go of judgments and be gentle with yourself. The silver lining? You just might get to see a glorious sunrise. Last medically reviewed on  May 7, 2019If you have a fondness for epic cinematic moods and need to set an atmosphere of concentration for 1 or 2 hours, this playlist is for you. Birth control IUDs are safe and effective, but there can be side effects. Learn if an IUD is right for you. Can’t wake up in the morning and smashing that snooze? The snooze button may be making it harder to wake up.Late-night snack attacks can lead to indigestion, belly bloat, and zero shut-eye. Follow these guidelines for the best foods for sleep.OUR BRANDSWhat can we help you find? Enter search terms and tap the Search button. Both articles and products will be searched.Please note: If you have a promotional code you'll be prompted to enter it prior to confirming your order.If you have an account, please sign in.If you subscribe to any of our print newsletters and have never activated your online account, please activate your account below for online access. By activating your account, you will create a login and password. You only need to activate your account once.Activate My AccountPay My Bill »See AllSee AllSee AllSee AllSee AllSee AllSee AllSee AllSee AllStop these common sleep stealers before they put your health at risk.You might remember a time when you could drift off to sleep in an instant and remain in a state of blissful slumber well past lunchtime the next day. Now your sleep is more likely to be lighter and more fitful, and when you wake up in the morning you might not always feel refreshed.A lack of good-quality sleep could be a natural consequence of changing sleep-wake patterns after menopause. It's also likely that the issue is physical—and fixable. Many conditions can disrupt your rest, and they can be treated. It's important to address these issues. A lack of sleep does more than make you drowsy. Chronic insomnia has been linked to a variety of health problems, including obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, and depression.Go through this list to see whether you might have one of these sleep-stealing conditions. Also check your medicine cabinet. Some medicines, including corticosteroids, beta blockers, cold and flu remedies, and certain antidepressants also can interfere with sleep.The conventional image of sleep apnea is of the overweight man who snores, but women of any size can also develop these repeated pauses in breathing while they sleep. "A woman who has a narrow jaw or a change in muscle tone can get apnea," says Dr. Julia Schlam Edelman, clinical instructor in obstetrics and reproductive biology at Harvard Medical School and author of Successful Sleep Strategies for Women and Menopause Matters: Your Guide to a Long and Healthy Life. Either of these anatomical issues can block oxygen from reaching your lungs (and subsequently the rest of your body) while you sleep. Snoring might not be your main symptom if you do have sleep apnea, but you will notice that you're especially sleepy during the day.Solution: See a specialist for a sleep study. You may be able to relieve apnea with a few lifestyle adjustments, such as sleeping on your side or losing weight. Your doctor might also suggest an oral appliance or a CPAP machine that blows air into your airways to keep them open at night.What you eat can affect your sleep. Spicy foods can contribute to painful heartburn. Big meals leave you uncomfortably full, and over time can contribute to obesity—a well-known risk factor for sleep apnea. Too much caffeine could keep you wide awake, even if you finish your coffee in the morning. "It takes six hours to clear half of the caffeine from your body. If you have enough caffeine, it's still in your body at 4 in the morning," says Dr. Edelman. And though a glass of wine or two with dinner will make you feel relaxed or even sleepy, it won't help you sleep. "You can fall asleep, but once you're asleep you can't sleep deeply," she says.Solution: Eat dinner at least a couple of hours before bedtime, and keep the meal light. Avoid spicy, fatty foods, as well as alcohol and caffeine. Also, don't drink too many fluids before bed. Having to constantly get up to go to the bathroom can disrupt your sleep, too.Sleep and exercise complement each other. Working out regularly can help you sleep better, and conversely, you're more likely to exercise if you get a good night's rest.Solution: Exercise every day if you can, ideally in the morning. Doing a high-energy aerobic routine too close to bedtime can have the opposite of the intended effect, making you too energized to sleep. A gentle yoga stretch before bed probably won't hurt, though. It might even help you relax.Arthritis aches or any other kinds of pain do not make for restful slumber. Conversely, a lack of sleep can increase your pain. Researchers believe that a lack of sleep may activate inflammatory pathways that exacerbate arthritis pain. Poor sleep can also make you more sensitive to the feeling of pain.Solution: In addition to the pain remedies your doctor recommends, try using a heating pad or taking a warm bath before bed to soothe achy joints or muscles. Lying against a body pillow can put you in a more comfortable position while you sleep.Women are twice as likely as men to have restless legs syndrome (RLS)—a condition that causes a creepy, crawly feeling and uncontrollable movements in the legs at night. It's often linked to hormonal changes early in life and during pregnancy, but RLS can continue as you get older. RLS isn't just miserably uncomfortable—researchers at Harvard have linked this condition to an increased risk for heart disease and depression in women.Solution: Try simple interventions first. Exercise every day, take a hot bath before bed, massage your legs, and cut back on things that can make you jittery—like caffeine and tobacco. If these measures don't work, your doctor may recommend one of several medicines that reduce RLS symptoms—including ropinirole (Requip), pramipexole (Mirapex), rotigotine (Neupro), or gabapentin enacarbil (Horizant)."Depression is a common compromiser of sleep, and it is much more common in women than in men," Dr. Edelman says. Women who are depressed may sleep more than usual, but their sleep isn't restful. Some of the antidepressants meant to counteract depression, particularly SSRIs, can also interfere with sleep.Solution: See your primary care doctor, psychologist, psychiatrist, or therapist for help, which may include medications, talk therapy, or both. If your antidepressant seems to be keeping you awake, ask your doctor to switch you to another drug.It's impossible to sleep when the weight of the day is pressing on you. Finding a sense of calm before bed isn't easy—especially when you can't unplug from the demands of your day.Solution: Establish wind-down time. Do a quiet, relaxing activity before bed that doesn't involve a screen. Talk to a friend or family member, sew, or read a real book—not one on a backlit tablet device. "Just allow yourself to have quiet time," Dr. Edelman adds. And don't sleep with your smartphone on your bedside table.Sometimes insomnia stems from long-ingrained behaviors, like staying up too late or engaging in stimulating activities before bed.Solution: Follow a few basic sleep hygiene strategies. Go to bed and wake up at the same times each day. Keep your bedroom cool, dark, and comfortable. Use your bed for sleep and sex only. If you can't fall asleep within 15 minutes, get up and leave the bedroom. Read or do another quiet activity for 15 to 20 minutes until you get sleepy. "I would encourage women to try sleep strategies first," says Dr. Edelman. "Then if those strategies don't work, I would recommend they talk to a sleep expert."Illustration: Alayna Paquette New subscriptions to Harvard Health Online are temporarily unavailable. Click the button below to learn about our other subscription offers.Learn More »Disclaimer:
    As a service to our readers, Harvard Health Publishing provides access to our library of archived content. Please note the date of last review or update on all articles. No content on this site, regardless of date, should ever be used as a substitute for direct medical advice from your doctor or other qualified clinician.Get health information and advice from the experts at Harvard Medical School.Obsessing over a decision or concern may be a sign of an anxiety disorder. Don't endure uncomfortable or unbearable levels of anxiety. Help is available and it makes a difference. Ask your doctor for treatment options, which range from talk therapy to medication.In each issue of HEALTHbeat:Each year, there are more than 40 million people in North America who suffer from sleeping disorders. An additional 20 million have occasional sleeping problems.There are many reasons for sleep deprivation: work, chores, babies, worry, parties or late night television are just a few.Whatever the reason for sleep loss, research has shown that it takes a toll on us both mentally and physically. While we sleep, our bodies secrete hormones that affect our mood, energy, memory, and concentration. Testing has shown that with a driving simulator or a hand-eye coordination task, sleep deprived people may perform just as badly as intoxicated people. In addition, recent research has shown that chronic lack of sleep can cause high blood pressure and contribute to problems with diabetes.Most people experience short term insomnia at some time. Insomnia includes having trouble falling asleep, having trouble getting back to sleep, and waking up too early. Insomnia is more common in females, people with a history of depression, and in people older than 60. Temporary insomnia can be caused by:Short-term insomnia lasts only a few days and is usually not a cause for concern. For example, with jet lag or even seasonal time changes, your internal body clock will readjust itself within several days. Insomnia is considered chronic when it lasts most nights for a few weeks or more. This longer-term condition deserves professional attention. If you are unsure whether you have chronic insomnia, experts suggest looking at it like you would a headache. If it goes on day after day, and nothing you do seems to help, you should see a health care professional, particularly if you cannot find a cause.Sometimes insomnia is caused by an underlying illness that needs treatment, such as:Feeling tired every now and then during the day is normal. But it is not normal for sleepiness to interfere with your routine activities. For example, you shouldn't be dozing off while reading the newspaper, during business meetings, or while sitting at a red light. Slowed thinking, trouble paying attention, heavy eyelids, and feeling irritable are other warning signs.If you're feeling sleepy frequently during the day, you might simply need to make more time to sleep. Experts say that most adults need at least eight hours of sleep every night to be well rested, but this varies from person to person. The bottom line is that you should sleep for the number of hours it takes for you to feel rested, refreshed, and fully alert the next day. If you've had a good sleep, you shouldn't feel drowsy during the day. Naps can be good, but the AmericanAcademy of Sleep Medicine recommends napping before 3 p.m. and for no longer than an hour so that it doesn't interfere with falling asleep at night.If you are sleeping an adequate amount and you still feel drowsy going about your day to day routine, or if adjusting your sleeping habits hasn't helped, then you should talk with your health care provider. Overwhelming daytime sleepiness could be due to a number of sleep disorders. For example, people with narcolepsy experience excessive sleepiness even after a full night's sleep.Snoring is noisy breathing during sleep that occurs when relaxed structures in the throat vibrate and make noise. Most snoring is harmless, though it can be a nuisance that interferes with the sleep of others. Some snoring can be stopped with lifestyle changes such as: There are over the counter nasal strips that are placed over the nose to widen the space in the nose and make breathing easier. Read labels carefully because these strips are only intended to treat snoring. The labels point out certain symptoms that require a doctor's care.The trick is figuring out the cause of snoring. It could be related to allergies or structural abnormalities such as nasal polyps or enlarged adenoids, which are lymphoid tissue behind the nose. If your snoring is loud and frequent and you also have excessive daytime sleepiness, you could have sleep apnea. People with sleep apnea tend to also be overweight, and it's more common among men than women.When a person with sleep apnea tries to breathe in air, it creates suction that collapses the windpipe and blocks the flow of air. Blood oxygen levels fall and the brain awakens the person, who then snorts or gasps for air and then resumes snoring. This cycle is typically repeated many times during the night. It results in frequent awakenings that prevent people from reaching the deepest stages of sleep, which leaves them sleepy during the day.First, is it helpful to understand the stages of sleep. We usually pass through five stages of sleep.Each cycle takes about two hours. Then the cycle starts over again with stage 1. As the cycles repeat, deep sleep periods get shorter and periods of REM sleep lengthen. Adults spend half of their sleep time in stage 2, 20 percent of the time in REM sleep, and 30 percent in the other stages. Infants start out spending about half of their sleep time in REM sleep.It may seem obvious, but we often seem to miss the basic fact that these stages take time; so one of the first things you can do to help yourself is to give yourself enough time to actually sleep. Many people count the time they get in to bed until they get up as their "8 hours". But if you spend 20 minutes reading and another 20 minutes watching television, and then have to figure another 10 to 15 minutes to get to sleep, you just cut 1 hour out of your sleep time.If consistently applying these tips doesn't work, see your health care professional and discuss your sleep problems. It is important to make sure that your sleep problems are not caused by a serious physical illness. You should also review the medications you are taking to make sure that they are not causing your sleep problems. Last, but not least, there are medications that can help you sleep that are safe when prescribed by a physician and taken as directed.Last Updated:
    May 18, 2017
Receive health tips and news in your inboxDon't forget to follow us on social media for the latest news and wellness information!
                        









                    Your source for health & community news.
                Mohammad Sheatt MD
                    Pulmonology                
Phone                         513-454-3050 
            
                    Bethesda Butler Sleep Center
                    3055 Hamilton Mason Road
                    
                    
                    Fairfield Township, OH 45011
                Find more doctors
View more classes/eventsHere you can check if your Aadhaar or Aadhaar submitted to you is a genuine one or not. Resident’s are using this service to verify the identity of their workers.Enter 12 digit Aadhaar number (UID)e-Aadhaar is a password protected electronic copy of Aadhaar, which is digitally signed by the competent Authority of 
								UIDAI.e-Aadhaar is a password protected electronic copy of Aadhaar, which is digitally signed by the competent Authority
									of UIDAI. You can download 'm-Aadhaar' from Google Playstore Click here to download It is a secure sharable document which can be used by any Aadhaar number holder for offline verification of Identification.A resident desirous of using this facility shall generate his/her digitally signed Aadhaar details by accessing UIDAI resident portal. The details will contain Name, Address, Photo, Gender, DOB, hash of registered Mobile Number, hash of registered Email Address and reference id which contains last 4 digits of Aadhaar Number followed by time stamp in a digitally signed XML. It will provide Offline Aadhaar Verification facility to service providers/Offline Verification Seeking Entity (OVSE) without the need to collect or store Aadhaar number.Headquarters Unique Identification Authority of India Government of India (GoI)Bangla Sahib Road, Behind Kali MandirGole Market, New Delhi - 110001UIDAI Regional Office, DelhiGround Floor, Pragati Maidan Metro Station, Pragati Maidan, New Delhi-110001Copyright © 2018 Unique Identification Authority of India All Rights ReservedJavaScript must be enabled to access this site.Last reviewed and updated on: 23-Mar-2021New Delhi: They are the country’s premier engineering institutes and getting into them is internationally considered more difficult than admission into Princeton, America’s Ivy League university. Last year, 1.5 million students took the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) to qualify for 13,000 seats in 23 IITs across the country — in other words, for each seat there were 115 aspirants.So intense is the pressure and so gruelling is the preparation required that students as young as 14 start the process, often missing out on the simple joys of adolescence. Most give up extra-curricular activities, relationships with friends and peers, and all forms of entertainment to achieve the goal. By the time they achieve their aim, if they do, many realise they have lost out on social skills, ability to communicate easily with others (an attribute now known as soft skills), and of course, some part of their youth.An IIT Delhi professor who has been teaching for the last two decades underlines this reality, saying when students come to them after two or three years of prep, they don’t even know how to behave socially. “They have been cut off from society, they are unaware of current affairs, and are desperately in need of our induction programme for freshers where we try to re-orient them to society and the institute,” the professor said on the condition of anonymity.This skill gap haunts them even when they graduate. Despite all the hard work engineering students put in, a survey conducted in 2019 found that 80 per cent of engineers “are not fit for any job in the knowledge economy and only 2.5 per cent of them possess technical skills in Artificial Intelligence (AI) that industry requires”. The skill gap between what they learn and what is required of them in their workspaces makes them unemployable. Yet, in India’s shortage economy, where everything of value is kept in limited supply, there is no end to this annual exercise of competing in the JEE. Like a 23-year-old machine learning engineer based out of Florida, who started his JEE preparation as early as Class 8, because his peers had started as early as Class 6. The engineer says he was so engrossed in his prep that he ignored basics such as good hygiene, good grooming, or even making friends. “It took me an entire gap year before undergraduation to recognise and overcome these shortcomings,” he now says.Or 29-year-old Shivam Narang, now working as a procurement manager with a prominent firm in Mumbai, who spent three years preparing for JEE. An “above average student”, he had to work 12-14 hours a day to crack one of the toughest exams in the world, making him lose out on much of his teenage years. A basketball player in high school, Narang had to quit the sport after Class 10, once he started preparing for the engineering entrance, moving to Kota from Delhi, the coaching college magnet for all IIT aspirants.“There is no room for hobbies – even playing your favourite sport for 30 minutes comes with a feeling of guilt,” Narang says. “Add to that the shift to an alien city with a competitive environment, which is so difficult to adjust to.” The constant pressure and fear of losing out led him to leave Kota. He took a break and took admission into a National Institute of Technology (NIT). “The loss of my values is what affected me the most. I am still very competitive and don’t feel comfortable working in a team. My personality changed, as did my body. I gained 35 kilos in a matter of months and my weight went up to 120 kilos,” Narang remembers.Also Read: 443 Delhi students committed suicide in 5 yrs, exam stress & failed relationships to blameSome students such as Narang start preparing for the JEE at the age of 16, but others start as early as 12. These students, along with attending regular school, also go to coaching sessions and take weekly examinations. In the routine of coaching, school and tests, students claim that they miss out on important life skills, networking and overall personality development.The National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) for medical college admission, which has become a political hot potato in Tamil Nadu, so much so that the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) has promised to scrap it, is only marginally less difficult. In 2020, more than 1.5 million students appeared for it, a 15 per cent rise from the number of applicants in 2018. Of them, under 800,000 students were able to qualify for one of the 82,026 seats at 541 medical colleges across the country. After the introduction of the examination in 2017, several students committed suicide after failing to clear it.  The DMK has promised to do away with the examination and put back in place the previous system of admission to medical colleges in the state, based on results of the state Class 12 board exam. The All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK), meanwhile, has offered to provide additional training to NEET aspirants.   According to coaching institutes, an average student spends 16 hours a week attending these extra classes, in addition to their regular school and studies. The annual financial cost of attending these sessions goes up to Rs 2 lakh. Pragya Bhardwaj, 35, who now practises as a gynaecologist in Bengaluru, took a three-year break after school to prepare for her medical entrance test.  “I could not get an MBBS seat in the first attempt and it required two more attempts. Finally, after the third attempt, I got a seat in a reputed medical college in Karnataka. But the journey to get there was gruelling and took a toll on my personality, my health, mental well-being and social connections, almost everything,” Bhardwaj recalls. Students are allowed two attempts at JEE, but there is no cap for the number of NEET attempts — there is, however, an age bar of 25. The problem is not individual but systemic. As Dr Soumitra Pathare, director of the Pune-based Centre for Mental Health Law and Policy, puts it: “If you create a scarcity for something and push young students to try and get that scarce product in a restricted environment, it is bound to affect them mentally. “Premier institutes in our country have an admission rate of about 0.1 per cent, so what kind of outcome can you expect? No matter how resilient an individual is, when the system is rigged against them, it is criminal when the individual breaks down.”  Parents go to the extent of disconnecting their children from the outer world to “help them focus”. Activities such as watching television, surfing the Internet, and participating in social events, sports and hobbies are placed at the bottom of the list of priorities. Shweta Garg, 50, a homemaker based out of Ahmedabad, says the two years her son spent preparing for the JEE meant the entire family put a pause on normal life.  “Those two years were not only difficult for my son but for the entire family as well. To ensure that he was able to focus on boards and competitive exams, we removed the cable connection so that there were zero disturbances for him. Family vacations and social events were given a skip and a serious environment was created in the house,” she told ThePrint.  Yet, her son was unable to make it to an IIT. Garg sidesteps that, saying she thinks her son matured during the period. Although he missed meeting his friends and cousins, he knew he had to prioritise.  Also Read: IIT-Hyderabad students blame isolated campus and academic pressure for suicidesCoaching institutes make things worse for aspirants. Kishore Kumar, an IIT Kharagpur alumnus based out of Delhi, who has been coaching JEE and NEET students for the past 11 years, says the institutes create an atmosphere where students are divided into batches based on their performance. If a student spends five years training in a ‘low-performing’ batch, it conditions the child to not think of himself/herself beyond a low-performing student. He/she will then hesitate to take part in group activities or anything else to assist his/her personality growth.Anand Kumar of ‘Super 30’ fame says he ensures the focus of his students is on enhancing their creativity so that they don’t become another cog in the wheel. “Most of my students are from rural backgrounds with poor financial stability,” he said. “Whoever shows a flair for scientific learning turns up for coaching. My focus largely remains on enhancing the ability of students to grasp concepts. They need to learn about real-life applications of their studies to ensure success even after getting into an IIT.” Speaking about the types of skills he imparts, Kumar said, “Instead of just going by textbook examples, I try to relate the concepts with their real life situations. This helps students understand things better. I also need to prepare them for a massive shift, from a rural setting to a college, and then a formal workplace. To do so, we pick examples of world leaders with humble beginnings and read from their biographies.” Of the 510 students he has trained over 19 years, 410 have got into IITs, NITs and other notable engineering colleges.   Some experts even question the necessity of coaching classes. Meeta Sengupta, founder of the Centre for Education Strategy, a Delhi-based think tank dealing in education policy issues, said: “Although experts say that coaching helps students take the exams, it is not healthy for children. They lose the space for discovery and innovation during the course of such training.” Several students, because of the lack of an outlet and no mindspace for anything other than studies, experience a burnout by the time they reach a university. This leads to several mental health problems. A mental health expert with an IIT, who chose to remain anonymous, said, “The most common problem among IIT students, who have all their lives been seen as high achievers, is the sense of a vacuum. It can also be called an ‘existential crisis’. After years of rigorous training, students start searching for a deeper meaning in life. This can either happen because of anxiety issues or depression, or exacerbate them as well.” Also Read: ‘We didn’t do enough’ — AIIMS faculty and students say after suicides by doctors(This report has been updated to accurately reflect that last year 1.5 million students took the JEE to qualify for 13,000 seats in 23 IITs across the country – and for each seat there were 115 aspirants, not 1,000. The error is regretted.)Subscribe to our channels on YouTube & Telegram Why news media is in crisis & How you can fix itIndia needs free, fair, non-hyphenated and questioning journalism even more as it faces multiple crises.But the news media is in a crisis of its own. There have been brutal layoffs and pay-cuts. The best of journalism is shrinking, yielding  to crude prime-time spectacle.ThePrint has the finest young reporters, columnists and editors working for it. Sustaining journalism of this quality needs smart and thinking people like you to pay for it. Whether you live in India or overseas, you can do it here.Support Our Journalism 1.5 million divided by 13000 is 115 not 1000
Bullshit article1.5 million for 13000 seats is 115 students per seat not 1000. You made mistake factor of 10 in mathematics and got impressive conclusions.A Software Developer who had completed from an ordinary college with good skills, with good experience in his or her career is still a Developer…they don’t get chance as Higher official…to maximize they may become a Team leader…Though they have extra ordinary skills they are not given a chance as Manager…Project lead…Here there is a regression in parents that because of an ordinary college ..they are not given a chance to prove..
They want there children to touch the sky ..which they couldn’t..that is also one of the reason for compelling the kids to go for An IIT ..and achieve the best ..which a parent couldn’t achieve in their career…and motivate their children to scarify their life…..Please correct your maths. For every seat there would be over a 100 aspirants and not 1000. 115 to be precise.There is no need to write  huge articles about these things, without some basic  information. It is a feudal language nation.The desperation is to escape the Thoo level in professional live and to arrive at the Aap level. Hobbies and  everything else can wait.In medical studies also the mood is the same. However, in the case of IIT, there is a dream of escaping from this social system and being able to run off to some native  English nation, possibly the US, where feudal languages are still in their budding state.I being a medico can totally relate to this and the caste reservations make it much more worse forus under general merit to get to our goals . It’s a rat race, you wanna study as genuinely as possible, you cannot . You need to gear up for the Rat Race that is your PG exams .That is where the whole beauty of studying dies. You cannot be a good doctor if you just study for exams . But that is where we are headed right now.Only loosers who can’t crack it themselves will say so. I am an IIT grad, had an amazing fun childhood with many friends who are still around and I am a national level badminton player. IIT doesn’t have anything to do with not having friends or a life.This article in itself is a overreaction… if u study ur syllabus gradually over a course of time it is not that big a deal to get in to iit… those who say it is impossible to get in without losing ur childhood are all lazy folks who doesn’t want to commit to their studies. If u don’t have conviction definitely u won’t reach the top..Lmaoo if my dad saw this….It’s going to get worse as the population explosion continues in India.We live but to suffer. -iit aspirant.Preparing for such exams, at least students will keep away from wasting time totally absorbed into entertainment world, and reading about movie actors actresses and or imbibe smoking, drinking, indulge in other adolescent activities joining with wrong companions / friends.
Training your mind to learn is no way unhealthy, especially in crucial development phase.
Not everyone wants to become movie artiste or RJ or TV anchors. For a Math oriented person it is a joy solving a math problem. For instance, Physics understanding the abstract concepts and solving numerical problems gives immense joy closer to understanding our own inner Self.We live but to suffer. (-X01,FIITJEE)We need politicians,  authors, poets, thinkers, philosophers,  journalists,  sportsmen,  athletes
But  over emphasized science education, will not be good for tomorrow’s generation.  No balance between selection and implementation. Everything is forced and compelled, no our students need selection and freedom to select the right course
Jai HindA very good article indeedThis Kota factory as well learning coding in early age is a serious issues. We need emphasize on creativity, innovation & knowledge. But Indian education system is not functioning on the core. These premium institute should have more seats as well as parents should be aware of diversification of subjects matter. Only IIT or medicos doesn’t have bright future. Our children needs a valuable life to have the harmony life with nature.Thank you for saying this.इसे कहते है हमारी गवर्मेन्ट का हमारे पैर पे कुल्हाड़ी मारना😪I have friends who gave up few years of their life for getting into IITs today they are decades ahead in everything that matters. They live like princes and have fantastic opportunities and enviable lives. This article is written for those who can feel happy to live in mediocracyPlease talk something about the problems that online classes are posing on student’s of country’s premier institutions be it iit,nit or anything else. We are getting 90% marks with 0% knowledge now even some IITs are running practical lab courses online. Now when government has reopened everything, they are doing rallys with lakhs of gatherings, opened schools then why can’t they open IITs.
We sacrifice our childhood to get a prized seat in IIT
to just sit in front of screen and professors just scrolling the PDFs. Are they not able to manage or they don’t want to, I doubt on the intension’s of this goverment do they want all of us to be like their illiterate ministers.
I believe The Print is very responsible news paper and specially when it comes to adress student issues.It’s the story that no Indian parent cares about. There’s no point writing about this. What could be done is improve the faculty, the facilities and most importantly the quality of education in other colleges in India, so that students like me who didn’t get into IIT are able to get a quality education and a well paying job.bitter truth….I also lost my childhood because of this!!The jee preparation is not that much intense which this article is directing and preparing it from class 8 doesn’t make sense😂.There are a lot of examples of Students who starts to prepare for it from 11th and got their goal achieved by consistent hardwork and dedication.Preparation from early classes is for only those students who are really interested in science and their curiosity is that much that they can’t wait for class 11 and this only improve their skills for jee and olympiads.It is also important to mention that rank in jee advanced depends upon how much one had studied in last 2,3,4 years but mostly depends upon  how a student spends last 2-3 months before jee adv.So, finally its totally a wrong myth that high performance in jee will comes from 3-4 years of preparation.Right guidance and support can make miracleThe pity of this is the needlessness of this competition. A smart society will provide diverse opportunity for all students in all subjects.. Education is important but Not this kind of rat race. What does this issue relate to Kumbh and Ram Manir?? Efforts wasted in non essential areas triggers a stampede here. Classic mistaken priority in a society.To exaggerated portrayal of downside of JEE preparation. Not a fair viewHats off to the writer 🖖There is lack of job for engineers instead of doctors.. Why?.. Patients are more in India.. So india needs more hospitals therefore requirement of medical staff.. At the same time india is lacking in technology.. Therefore less job opportunity for engineers.. Govt should take a look on this matter..Incorrect information. There is no age bar in NEET. It was stayed by the courts. Please do your research properlyEven this thing continue after mbbs as neet pg where mbbs graduate study for years to clear even more competitive and difficult pg entance exam and don’t know what will happen if next arrives where five years of University exam’s comes into questionMedical and too engineering colleges entrances have been tough due to demand supply skew, and the advantages these fields offered. What are the alternatives:
1. Ban these exams and choose students through referrals – then we risk nepotism. At least on face value the exams are fair.
2. More colleges- Many engineering seats are going empty. Supply of seats is there, but there is a scram towards the perceived top seats.
3. Lottery for seats – may reduce exam stress, but then whether would it be fair to students and institutions
4. Diversification and elevation of other branches – that is happening with time and will occur more as economy prospers. People may not need to do IIT to IIM to Finance.When ones goal is to get into an iit, one is bound to feel empty inside if he does manage to get in. The kind of parents that force their children through this hopefully dies out with this generation of parents . I world ask my children to think twice before becoming an engineer. Especially when the go to goal is a job at a “prestigious” mnc. No wonder so many iitians wander out of their field in search of fulfilment.The really appreciate the effort you put in writing this article. This is the first article I’ve seen saying the sad reality of preparing for JEE Mains. I attempted two exams this year and it was really difficult because of the pandemic. But people say everyone struggled and went through the same road, the answer is no. People have different abilities and skills and that is what makes us unique from others. Thank you so much for making this article.The sort of lament which this article indulges in is best addressed to parents.
Parents need to be counselled that their children are simply not capable of joining the IITs or of surviving there.
Parents need to be told that they should let their children lead normal lives and that they should be happy with whatever their child achieves.
Children need to be told that the world is a complex place. That while they may be good at something they may not necessarily be good at science technology and mathematics. As it is most children in India study Arts subjects. They should be taught the Gita and the lesson that they should be happy in whatever they do.Save my detailsTomorrow is different. Let's reshape it todayLet's get smarter about money#TougherTogetherHunt for the brightest engineers in IndiaMental Health Awareness InitiativeThe Dynamic Duo of a Holistic Self-CareDownload The Economic Times News App to get Daily Market Updates & Live Business News.Trending NowPopular CategoriesHot on WebIn Case you missed itET VerticalsMore from our networkOther useful LinksservicesFind this comment offensive?Choose your reason below and click on the Report button. This will alert our moderators to take actionReason for reporting:Your Reason has been Reported to the admin.Log In/Connect with:Will be displayedWill not be displayedWill be displayed₹399/monthMonthly
                	                        PLAN
                	                    Billed Amount ₹399No Trial Period₹208/month(Save 49%)Yearly
                	                        PLAN
                	                    Billed Amount ₹2,49915 
                    	                                    Days Trial
                    	                                +Includes DocuBay and TimesPrime Membership.₹150/month(Save 63%)2-Year
                	                        PLAN
                	                    Billed Amount ₹3,59915 
                    	                                    Days Trial
                    	                                +Includes DocuBay and TimesPrime Membership.Holi Offer on ET PrimeGet 25% off on 1 & 2 Year PlansSpecial Offer on ET PrimeSubscribe & get 30% off on 2-Year PlanSpecial Offer on ET PrimeSubscribe & get 30% off on 2-Year PlanSharp Insight-rich, Indepth stories across 20+ sectorsAccess the exclusive Economic Times stories, Editorial and Expert opinionStories you might be interested in"No" (stylized in all caps) is a song recorded by American singer-songwriter Meghan Trainor for her second major-label studio album Thank You (2016). It was written by Trainor, Ricky Reed, and Jacob Kasher Hindlin, and produced by Reed. The track was released on March 4, 2016, as the lead single from the album. Backed by a guitar instrumentation, the dance-pop and R&B song draws some influences from doo-wop, with lyrics about unwanted advances from men towards women.
Its composition was compared by several critics to the music of various pop artists of the late 1990s and early 2000s, such as Britney Spears and NSYNC. "No" was a commercial success, becoming Trainor's second single to reach the top three on the US Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number three. It also reached the top ten in several European countries (Austria, Spain, Scotland), as well as in Australia and Canada.
Fatima Robinson directed the music video for "No". It was set at a warehouse, noted to be visually darker than Trainor's previous clips and featured her dancing alongside an all-female dance troupe. The clip drew comparisons to the works of Spears and Madonna for its sexual nature. Trainor has performed "No" on several shows, including the 3rd iHeartRadio Music Awards, The Graham Norton Show, The Ellen DeGeneres Show, and the 2016 Billboard Music Awards. She also performed it during The Untouchable Tour (2016).L.3ams atp
Referring to her meeting with label director L.A. Reid, Meghan Trainor revealed that he had told the singer she then lacked a proper lead single for her upcoming album, and that she "[had] an album of Nice Meghan".[1] Trainor said it took little time to craft the song with producer Ricky Reed, explaining that she told him that they "needed a big eff-you song, an anthem about girl power that sounded like nothing on the album".[1] The duo wrote "No" the same day. She went into the studio wanting to write a "big, angry anthem", but described the final product as an anthem about independence for women.[2] Trainor added that she will "never forget that moment" when she was "too scared" to play it for Reid, but he played it more than 29 times.[1] Ultimately, the song changed the direction of its parent album, as they started experimenting with new musical styles and produced six more tracks.[3]
Trainor stated in December 2015, that she had almost completed her second major-label studio album, describing the material as "something that's not on the radio" and "different".[4] She began teasing the lead single on Twitter in late January 2016.[5] In a Fuse interview published on February 2, Trainor confirmed the song title as "No" along with a March release date, and stated that it is an anthem for women about telling a man that they are "out here on [their] own" and good with it. She also said that the theme of the song is her in a club, where a man approaches her and she goes "no no no. I don't need your hands all over me. I'm good. I'm gonna dance on my own with my girls".[6] Billboard gave a preview of the lyrics: "My name is 'no'/My number is 'no'".[7]
On March 1, 2016, Trainor unveiled the single artwork for "No" on her social media accounts.[8] It features the singer with red hair in an emerald green-colored dress.[9] She shared the song's hook "Untouchable, untouchable" two days later.[10] It was digitally released on March 4, along with the artwork and preorder for its parent album Thank You (2016).[11][9] In the United States, "No" was serviced to adult contemporary radio stations on March 7, and to contemporary hit radio stations the next day.[12][13] The song was selected as the 'Track of the Day' by BBC Radio 1 on March 7, and sent to contemporary hit radio stations in Italy on March 11.[14][15] A karaoke version of it appears as the 18th track on the Japanese edition of Thank You.[16]
Musically, "No" is a dance-pop and R&B song that draws some influence from doo-wop, with guitar instrumentation.[17][18][19] The song opens with modern doo-wop vocals, before it charges up into an early millennium-pop vibe with its beat and crunchy guitar;[17] for Billboard's Joe Lynch, it features retro music playing through an "old-timey crackle" before coming to a stop, followed by a Neptunes-esque beat.[19] Lyrically, the song discusses men who approach women and "can't take the hint" when their advances are rejected according to Los Angeles Times' Gerrick Kennedy.[3] The song finds Trainor confronting a guy who won't stop pursuing her in a club: "My name is no, my sign is no, my number is no, you need to let it go", she sings during the "catchy, chant-along" chorus.[20] The lyrics were noted to be "clever, sassy" and a display of attitude. In the pre-chorus, Trainor tells women everywhere to pay attention and follow her lead.[20] "No" is written in the key of C♯ minor in common time. The song begins with a tempo of 73 beats per minute for the introduction before increasing to 94 beats per minute. Trainor's vocals span one and a half octaves throughout the song, from G♯3 to C♯5.[21] When asked about the song's inspiration in an interview, Trainor stated that she wanted to be better at being single, and that the song is "a big anthem" for helping young girls and teens who are growing up realize that they don't need a man, and that they "can go out with [their] girls and have just as much fun".[22]
"No" has been noted to showcase a more grown-up and "in-charge" side of Trainor compared to her previous work. Its lyrics involve themes about telling a "pushy" male counterpart to "back off".[2] It has been described as "earwormy" and called "familiar yet altogether new territory" for the singer.[22] Fuse's Emilee Lindner noted the song as a departure from Trainor's earlier work as well, writing that she "ditched the upright bass and the Hammond B and swapped in a '90s pop drum kit" and likened it to Mýa's song "My Love Is Like...Wo" (2003). Lindner added that it was lyrically opposite to Trainor's debut, stating that it's an empowering song, but without the problematic lyrics in her previous work. She called it a "flat fuck-you" to entitled men who approach women with unsolicited advances.[23]
Writing for Billboard, Joe Lynch stated that Trainor made it clear on the song that there is more to her than "what you think you know". He added that the singer was confident on "All About That Bass", but on "No" she's entirely in charge.[19] In a positive review, Brennan Carley from Spin wrote that "No" "is definitely a new direction for Trainor, who's mostly tossing aside her sock-hopping persona for no-nonsense truth-telling", and added that it "combines everything you loved (or hated) about early NSYNC and Britney Spears melodies".[24] Digital Spy's Amy Davidson described the song as "gloriously '90s".[25] Forbes contributor Hugh McIntyre described it as a noticeable departure from her previous work, adding that it is "sultrier and a little more aggressive".[26] Lucy Bacon of MTV News called it a "girl power anthem".[27] Mike Wass of Idolator praised the song, describing it as "slinky, turn-of-the-millennium R&B/pop" and tipped it as a cross between Christina Aguilera and Destiny's Child.[28] According to Time's Nolan Feeney, the song has NSYNC vibes, and probably could have been a Britney Spears song 15 years ago.[29]
Isabella Biedenharn of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Trainor "serves up a catchy sundae of whistles and sassy quips" on "No".[30] Writing for Newsday, Glenn Gamboa opined that the singer puts her own twists on the usual club tale, using a Destiny's Child-esque style to create an empowerment song that is "so catchy that it's tough to shake".[31] Describing it as a "clubby/girl-group rumbler", Knoxville News Sentinel's Chuck Campbell stated that her brush-off of a suitor on it is playful.[32] Chris Conaton of PopMatters wrote that "No" fits right in Trainor's wheelhouse, but described it as a far cry from the doo wop and early girl group-inspired songs on her debut record.[33] Spin's Dan Weiss stated that the song, which has a chorus influenced by TLC, wipes out the "pastel-colored trauma" from "All About That Bass", calling the end result seamless and glorious.[34] According to Slant Magazine's Alexa Camp, it pretends to be a suffragette's anthem as if "rejecting an unsolicited suitor were the ultimate expression of female agency".[35] Writing for ABC News, Allan Raible stated that "No" has "its heart in the right place", but ends up being gimmicky. He added that the song is built around a watered-down version of music released by Destiny's Child and En Vogue years earlier.[36]
Billboard named "No" the 100th best song of 2016, writing that "after decades of men singing to women they know 'want it' on the dance floor, Meghan Trainor hits the club and K.O.'s the entitled male ego with one simple word: 'No'", describing it as the middle ground between "Dear Future Husband" and "actually finding that husband", adding that the singer "shut[s] down a lot of bull" on it.[37] On the other hand, Time named "No" the eighth-worst song of 2016, noting that Trainor had been criticized in the past for "espousing anti-feminist messages in her lyrics and interviews", and that "'No', on its surface, "seemed like a corrective". The staff called the song's message "flimsy" and its melody "uninspired and repetitive", while also asserting that it showcases her "blaccent", and called it "a noteworthy example of the kind of cultural appropriation that has plagued popular music throughout its history".[38]
"No" debuted at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the chart dated March 26, 2016, marking her highest entrance. The single opened at number two on Digital Songs with 113,000 copies sold in its first week of release. "No" also debuted at number 21 on Radio Songs (46 million in airplay audience), marking the highest debut on the chart since Lady Gaga's "Born This Way" had debuted at number 6 more than five years prior. Also, "No" added 3.3 million first-week domestic streams, even without an official music video or audio on Trainor's Vevo channel.[39] In its third week, "No" entered the Hot 100's top ten on the chart dated April 9, 2016, ascending from 12 to 6 and becoming her fourth song to reach the top ten. The song marked her fastest climb to the top ten, besting the four-week ascent of "All About That Bass". Additionally, "No" became Trainor's second number-one song on the Digital Songs chart, after selling 128,000 downloads during that week.[40] The following week, besides descending to number two on the Digital Songs chart with 147,000 downloads sold, "No" ascended from six to three on the Hot 100, becoming Trainor's second top-three song.[41] It was certified 2x platinum by the RIAA for shipments of 2 million copies and placed at number 45 on the Billboard Year-end chart for 2016.[42][43]
"No" was successful in Canada, peaking at number 10, and being certified 3x platinum by Music Canada.[44][45] The song went number one on the Mexico Ingles Airplay chart and in Latvia.[46][47] It debuted at number 59 on the UK Singles Chart, and later peaked at number 11.[48] "No" peaked at number 20 on the Irish Singles Chart, and at number 77 in Poland.[49][50] Despite its low chart peak, the song was certified 2x platinum in the latter country.[51] It reached number six in Spain.[52] "No" peaked at number nine in Australia, and spent a total of 13 weeks on the chart.[53] The song was certified 3x platinum for shipments of over 210,000 units by the ARIA.[54] It reached number 18 in New Zealand, and was eventually certified gold by the RMNZ.[55][56] Other chart peaks include number three in Israel and number two in South Africa.[57][58]
The accompanying music video for "No" was shot on March 4, 2016,[59] and directed by Fatima Robinson.[60] Trainor wanted the music video to be darker, more sexually appealing and very different than her previous works, in order to match the different sound of the song.[61] She aimed for it to be of the standard of her music video for "All About That Bass", but with completely the opposite feel.[59] The video included several choreographed routines with a dance move for each lyric; Trainor said it was the most she had danced in her life.[19] Trainor's stylist, Maya Krispin, chose 1990s pop-inspired outfits for the singer that were comfortable enough for her to dance in. Trainor was particularly drawn to metallic gold coat designed by Isabel Marant which was light and aided great movement. Other outfits chosen included a black sequined blazer by Veronica Beard and a customized crimson outfit by Michael Costello. Krispin custom designed the rest of Trainor ensemble: a black jumpsuit with a bedazzled bra, and fishnet bodysuit.[61] Although Trainor wanted the video to be sexier, she opted to wear bodysuits that fully covered her body because she felt insecure about showing her cleavage, particularly her arms.[62] Trainor first shared a still from the clip on Instagram on March 16.[28] The music video was released on YouTube and Vevo on March 21.[62]
The music video begins with Trainor walking through an abandoned warehouse filled with smoke and old industrial machines.[64][65] A troupe of backup dancers join her at a location in the warehouse where they perform a tightly choreographed dance routine.[63] Trainor is also shown in individual scenes kneeling on a floor while throwing her hair back and forth, and standing in front of a high-powered fan.[62] She later proceeds to dance on a platform in the warehouse, accompanied by the troupe. In another segment, Trainor is seen on a couch intertwining her legs with other women and touching theirs and her own cleavage.[62] Throughout the video, there are black and red silhouette shots of a woman dancing with torch flames. Near the end, she appears dancing with open flares.[66]
The music video for "No" was well received by critics. Lynch likened Trainor's styling to early 2000s music videos by Spears, and late 1990s videos by Madonna, adding: "It's a much sexier look than we're used to seeing from Trainor, but she owns it, looking as comfortable in the vaguely Erotica-esque outfits of the "No" video as she did in the Easter pastels of her 'All About That Bass' clip".[63] Lorena Blas of USA Today highlighted Trainor's choreography and her growth from "All About That Bass", comparing it to choreography by Missy Elliott and Janet Jackson, and Destiny's Child's music video for "Jumpin', Jumpin'" (2000).[67] Atkinson complimented Trainor's "tough-and-sexy look" and found the video "very Y2K-leaning", likening it to a number of late 1990s and early 2000s music videos.[68] Sasha Geffen from MTV News shared this view, writing that the "No" video "brings back some major '90s pop vibes — think TLC, Destiny's Child, and Britney Spears — and even seems to nod to those early iPod commercials with its black and red silhouette shots".[66] Joey Nolfi of Entertainment Weekly highlighted its change from the subdued style of Trainor's music video for "Like I'm Gonna Lose You" (2015), commenting that she was "confidently stomping through" and pursuing "genuine pop star choreography".[64] John Paul Stapleton of The Boston Globe opined that the video "shows a more sultry side" of the singer and "recalls Janet Jackson in her prime".[69] Jordan Simon from Idolator complimented Trainor's edgier image, noting that she "gracefully avoids the sophomore slump" with the video.[70] Jennifer Davis of InStyle wrote that the clip showed Trainor in a whole new light, and deemed the singer "unapologetic" and her dancing "fierce".[71]
Osterheldt found the song better than the music video, but said the video's sexiness strengthened the message of "No" and praised it for "normalizing a woman's right to say no, [...] in a sexy way", reasoning: "Too often men think a woman's clothes or demeanor mean that she is asking for it, that they are entitled to her body".[72] In less enthusiastic reviews, Brodsky said Nicki Minaj "did the underground dominatrix thing better" with her music video for "Only" (2014),[73] while Dennis Hinzmann of Out magazine criticized Trainor's dancing, writing: "Unfortunately for her the pros show her up and make her look for the most part noncommittal. If you're going to pop, lock, and head snap, you have to feel it in your soul".[74]
Trainor performed "No" live for the first time at the 3rd iHeartRadio Music Awards on April 3, 2016. Billboard ranked it as the seventh best performance of the night, and wrote that her "comfort as a choreographed dancer doesn't quite match the fire she brings to her vocals", but she still dominated due to her delivery.[75] She performed the track on The Graham Norton Show on April 8,[76] on The Voice UK final on April 10,[77] and on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on April 20. During the latter two performances, Trainor performed one-armed choreography; she was clad in a parkly skirt and military jacket during her Ellen performance.[78][77] It was also performed at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards on May 22, 2016.[79] For the performance, Trainor donned a multihued and spangly dress and strolled through the crowd. Rolling Stone was critical of it, ranking it as one of the worst performances of the night and stating that the singer "just couldn't sell her hit onstage" and was upstaged by her dress, the audience's glowing wristbands and the celebrities that sang along with her.[80] She performed "No" for Today's Citi Concert series on June 21, 2016.[81] "No" was included on the setlist for Trainor's The Untouchable Tour (2016). It was the last song performed, serving as the encore.[82] A-cappella group Pentatonix covered the song in a video released via their YouTube channel, in April 2016.[83] It was also covered by Allison Iraheta and other alumni at the series finale of American Idol on April 7.[84] "No" is featured in the television series Superstore.[85]
 
 
* Sales figures based on certification alone. Sales+streaming figures based on certification alone.(Entry 1 of 6)noDefinition of no (Entry 2 of 6)noDefinition of no (Entry 3 of 6)noDefinition of no (Entry 4 of 6)NoDefinition of No (Entry 5 of 6)          less common spelling of
                                  noh
                    NoDefinition of No (Entry 6 of 6)Keep scrolling for moreSynonyms: AdverbSynonyms: NounAntonyms: AdverbAntonyms: Noun
                                    These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'no.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
                                Adverbbefore the 12th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1aAdjective12th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1aNoun1598, in the meaning defined at sense 1Adverb
                Middle English, from Old English nā, from ne not + ā always; akin to Old Norse & Old High German ne not, Latin ne-, Greek nē-  — more at aye            Keep scrolling for moreShare noTime Traveler for noSee more words from the same century
                    NN
                
                    NNE
                
                    NNW
                
                    no
                
                    No
                
                    No. 1
                
                    noa
                Last Updated17 Mar 2021Cite this Entry“No.” Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/no. Accessed 23 Mar. 2021.Keep scrolling for moreMore Definitions for nono (Entry 1 of 3)noEnglish Language Learners Definition of no (Entry 2 of 3)noEnglish Language Learners Definition of no (Entry 3 of 3)See the full definition for no in the English Language Learners Dictionaryno (Entry 1 of 4)noKids Definition of no (Entry 2 of 4)noKids Definition of no (Entry 3 of 4)no.no (Entry 1 of 2)NoMedical Definition of No (Entry 2 of 2)Keep scrolling for moreMore from Merriam-Webster on noThesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for noNglish: Translation of no for Spanish SpeakersBritannica English: Translation of no for Arabic SpeakersComments on noWhat made you want to look up no? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).
    See Definitions and Examples »
  Get Word of the Day daily email!Up in the Sky: A QuizTest your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge!A daily challenge for crossword fanatics.Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!The difference between what is right and what fee...Words from the week of 3/19/2021We're raisin' the issues of the day. A word for what seems like long ago. We're intent on clearing it upWe're gonna stop you right thereHow to use a word that (literally) drives some pe...The awkward case of 'his or her'It's a bird? It's a plane? No, I'm really asking....Updated with more commonly confused words!Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question ...A game of winding words.Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIESFOLLOW US© 2021 Merriam-Webster, IncorporatedEric Burton Frederic (born July 23, 1982), known professionally as Ricky Reed, is an American artist, Grammy-nominated music producer, songwriter and founder of Nice Life Recording Company.[3] Reed is a solo artist and is also known as the lead vocalist of Facing New York and the MC, multi-instrumentalist and songwriter of the pop, hip hop and electronic music act Wallpaper.[4]
Ricky Reed has received RIAA platinum records for two Jason Derulo singles: Talk Dirty ft. 2 Chainz (4× Platinum) & Wiggle ft. Snoop Dogg (2× Platinum).[5]
In 2015, Ricky Reed received a BMI Pop Award for his work on Talk Dirty.[6]Dance-pop is a popular music subgenre that originated in the early 1980s. It is generally uptempo music intended for nightclubs with the intention of being danceable but also suitable for contemporary hit radio. Developing from a combination of dance and pop with influences of disco,[3] post-disco[4] and synth-pop,[2] it is generally characterised by strong beats with easy, uncomplicated song structures[3] which are generally more similar to pop music than the more free-form dance genre, with an emphasis on melody as well as catchy tunes.[3] The genre, on the whole, tends to be producer-driven, despite some notable exceptions.[3]
Dance-pop is known for being highly eclectic, having borrowed influences from other genres, which varied by producers, artists and periods. Such include contemporary R&B, house, trance, techno, electropop, new jack swing, funk and pop rock.
Dance-pop is a popular mainstream style of music and there have been numerous artists and groups who perform in the genre. Notable artists include Cher, Madonna, Britney Spears, Kylie Minogue, Christina Aguilera, Spice Girls, Paula Abdul, Backstreet Boys, Michael Jackson, NSYNC, Jennifer Lopez, Janet Jackson, JoJo Siwa, Rihanna, Taylor Swift, Selena Gomez, Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, and Ariana Grande.
As the term "disco" started to go out of fashion by the late 1970s to early 1980s, other terms were commonly used to describe disco-based music, such as "post-disco", "club", "dance" or "dance-pop" music.[3] These genres were, in essence, a more modern variant of disco music known as post-disco, which tended to be more experimental, electronic and producer/DJ-driven, often using sequencers and synthesizers.
Dance-pop music emerged in the 1980s as a combination of dance and pop, or post-disco, which was uptempo and simple, club-natured, producer-driven and catchy. Dance-pop was more uptempo and dancey than regular pop, yet more structured and less free-form than dance music, usually combining pop's easy structure and catchy tunes with dance's strong beat and uptempo nature. Dance-pop music was usually created, composed and produced by record producers who would then hire singers to perform the songs.
In the beginning of the 1980s, disco was an anathema to the mainstream pop. According to prominent Allmusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine, Madonna had a huge role in popularizing dance music as mainstream music, utilizing her charisma, chutzpah and sex appeal. Erlewine claimed that Madonna "launched dance-pop" and set the standard for the genre for the next two decades.[5] As the primary songwriter on her self-titled debut album and a co-producer by her third record, Madonna's insistence on being involved in all creative aspects of her work was highly unusual for a female dance-pop vocalist at the time. The staff of Vice magazine stated that her debut album "drew the blueprint for future dance-pop."[6]
In the 1980s, dance-pop was closely aligned to other uptempo electronic genres, such as Hi-NRG. Prominent producers in the 1980s included Stock, Aitken and Waterman, who created Hi-NRG/dance-pop for artists such as Kylie Minogue, Dead or Alive and Bananarama. During the decade, dance-pop borrowed influences from funk (e.g. Michael Jackson and Whitney Houston), new jack swing (e.g. Janet Jackson and Paula Abdul), and contemporary R&B.
Other prominent dance-pop artists and groups of the 1980s included the Pet Shop Boys, Mel and Kim, Samantha Fox, Debbie Gibson, and Tiffany.
By the 1990s, dance-pop had become a major genre in popular music. Several dance-pop groups and artists emerged during the 1990s, such as the Spice Girls, Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera, Jessica Simpson, Backstreet Boys, and 'NSYNC. During the early 1990s, dance-pop borrowed influences from house music (e.g. Right Said Fred's "I'm Too Sexy", Taylor Dayne's Soul Dancing, and Madonna's "Vogue", "Rescue Me" and "Deeper and Deeper"), as well as contemporary R&B and new jack swing (e.g. Shanice's "I Love Your Smile").
By the late 1990s, electronic influences became evident in dance-pop music; Madonna's critically acclaimed and commercially successful album Ray of Light (1998) incorporated techno, trance and other forms of electronic dance music, bringing electronica into mainstream dance-pop. Additionally, also in 1998, Cher released a dance-pop song called "Believe" which made usage of a technological innovation of the time, Auto-Tune. An audio processor and a form of pitch modification software, Auto-Tune is commonly used as a way to correct pitch and to create special effects. Since the late 1990s, the use of Auto-Tune processing has become a common feature of dance-pop music.
Celine Dion also released a midtempo dance-pop song, "That's the Way It Is" by the end of 1999. Also during this period, some British bands connected with Britpop and alternative pop experimented with dance pop as a form - examples include Catatonia single Karaoke Queen, Bis's top 40 hit Eurodisco, Kenickie's final single Stay in the Sun and Romo band Orlando's major label debut single "Just For A Second." Another Britpop band, Theaudience was fronted by Sophie Ellis Bextor who went on to a successful solo career primarily in artist-driven dance-pop.
At the beginning of the 2000s, dance-pop music was still prominent, and highly electronic in style, influenced by genres such as trance, house, techno and electro. Nonetheless, as R&B and hip hop became extremely popular from the early part of the decade onwards, dance-pop was often influenced by urban music. Dance-pop stars from the 1980s and 1990s such as Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera, Madonna, Janet Jackson and Kylie Minogue continued to achieve success at the beginning of the decade. Whilst much dance-pop at the time was R&B-influenced, many records started to return to their disco roots; Kylie Minogue's albums such as Light Years (2000) and Fever (2001) contained influences of disco music, or a new 21st-century version of the genre known as nu-disco; hit singles such as "Spinning Around" (2000) and "Can't Get You Out of My Head" (2001) also contained disco traces.[3] In Madonna's case, her album Music (2000) contained elements of Euro disco, especially the successful eponymous lead single.[7]
Nevertheless, it was not until the mid-to-latter part of the decade when dance-pop music returned greatly to its disco roots; this can be seen with Madonna's album Confessions on a Dance Floor (2005), which borrowed strong influences from the genre, especially from 1970s artists and bands such as ABBA, Giorgio Moroder, the Bee Gees and Donna Summer. Britney Spears' album Blackout (2007) contained influences of Euro disco.
The mid-to-late 2000s saw the arrival of several new dance-pop artists, including Rihanna, Kesha, Katy Perry and Lady Gaga. This period in time also saw dance-pop's return to its more electronic roots aside from its disco ones, with strong influences of synthpop and electropop. Lady Gaga is frequently considered as one of the pioneers of this evolution, notably with her singles "Just Dance" and "Poker Face" which were heavily influenced by synthpop and electropop.[8] Rihanna's singles in the dance-pop genre, including "Don't Stop the Music" and "Disturbia", contained electronic influences, the former of which has elements of house music,[9] the latter electropop. Kesha's debut single, "Tik Tok", was also highly electronic in style and employed a video game beat. Katy Perry's "Hot N Cold" (2008), "California Gurls" (2010), and "Firework" (2010), which were major commercial hits, also showcased influences of electropop and house music.
The 2010s, similarly to the late 2000s, saw strong electronic influences present within dance-pop and also strong emphasis on bass-heavy drum beats. Artists such as Britney Spears, Lady Gaga, Taylor Swift, Katy Perry, Madonna, Kesha, Christina Aguilera, Usher and Rihanna remained very popular, while newer recording artists such as Ariana Grande, Justin Bieber, Rita Ora, and Dua Lipa joined the dance-pop charts within the decade.[10]
American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift's albums Red (2012), 1989 (2014) and Reputation (2017) contain more of a pop-influenced sound, which features production by dance-pop record producers Max Martin and Shellback. Ariana Grande's single "Problem" featuring Iggy Azalea was a big hit in 2014 and reached combined sales and track-equivalent streams of 9 million units worldwide the following year.[11]
Dance-pop generally contains several notable characteristics, which are listed here:As a precautionary health measure for our support specialists in light of COVID-19, we're operating with a limited team. If you need help with a product whose support you had trouble reaching over the phone, consult its product-specific Help Center.Learn more about
  Google's Product Experts ProgramElysian Park is a neighborhood in Central Los Angeles, California. It is a predominantly low-income community, and has a population of more than 2,600 people. A city park, Elysian Park,[1] and Dodger Stadium are within the neighborhood, as are a Catholic high school and an elementary school.
On August 2, 1769, the Portolá expedition (the first Europeans to see inland areas of California) camped close to the Los Angeles River near what is now the southeastern corner of the city park. California Historical Landmark #655 (Portolá Trail Campsite) is at the park's Meadow Road entrance.
According to the Mapping L.A. project of the Los Angeles Times, the Elysian Park neighborhood is flanked on the north and northeast by Elysian Valley, on the east by Lincoln Heights, on the southeast and south by Chinatown and on the southwest, west and northwest by Echo Park.[2] Street and other boundaries are: the northern apex at Exit 138 of the Golden State Freeway, thence southeasterly along the freeway, southerly along the Los Angeles River, westerly along North Broadway, northwesterly along Stadium Way, Academy Road and northerly along Elysian Park Drive.[3][4]
The 2000 U.S. census of the Elysian Park neighborhood counted 2,530 residents in its 1.65 square miles, which includes all the city park land as well as Dodger Stadium—an average of 1,538 people per square mile, one of the lowest population densities in Los Angeles county. In 2008 the city estimated that the population had increased to 2,659. The median age for residents was 31, about average for Los Angeles; the percentage of residents aged 11 to 18 were among the county's highest.[3]
The neighborhood was moderately ethnically diverse. The breakdown was Latinos, 47.6%; Asians, 43.4%; whites, 3.1%; blacks, 2.1%, and others, 3.7%. China (32.3%) and Mexico (27.3%) were the most common places of birth for the 54.4% of the residents who were born abroad, a high figure compared to rest of the city.[3]
The median yearly household income in 2008 dollars was $28,263, low for Los Angeles; a high percentage of households had an income of $20,000 or less. The average household size of 3.1 people was high for the city of Los Angeles. Renters occupied 81.9% of the housing stock, and house- or apartment owners 18.1%.[3]
Thirteen percent of the neighborhood residents aged 25 and older had earned a four-year degree by 2000, an average figure for the city.[3]
The schools operating within the Elysian Park neighborhood borders are:[5]
At Solano Avenue Elementary School, things are done right. Parents chip in, teachers stick around for years, children learn, and the surrounding community claims it for their own. The campus is a thing of pride-no graffiti or trash problems here.[6]
The park is one of largest in Los Angeles at 600 acres (2.4 km²).[1] It is also the city's oldest park, founded in 1886 by the Elysian Park Enabling Ordinance. It hosted shooting as well as the shooting part of the modern pentathlon event for the 1932 Summer Olympics.[7] In 1964 the Citizens Committee to Save Elysian Park was founded to prevent the City of Los Angeles from constructing the Municipal Convention Center on 62 acres (250,000 m2) of park land.
In 1968, it hosted a hippie "Love-In."[8]
The Figueroa Street Tunnels take northbound State Route 110 (the Pasadena Freeway) through the park.
Solano Canyon is a canyon within Elysian Park and also the name of a residential district at the southern extremity of the Elysian Park neighborhood, directly north of the Los Angeles State Historic Park. The district is bisected near its southern tip by the Arroyo Seco Parkway, and it shares a border with Chinatown (Los Angeles).
Solano Canyon was also an old name for a ravine in the Hollywood Hills that was later named Runyon Canyon.[9][10]Or has the see and hear and speak-no-evil stance of the Republican House persuaded him that he is in the clear?These days, plenty of women are turning to online sites for no-frills male companionship.Riffing off the slogan “Now Everyone Can Fly,” the carrier offered no-frills flights that were both cheap and plentiful.And why would its ostensible spokesperson refuse to answer yes/no questions about them?Because Wright was a no-show in criminal court to face the loud music and pot bust he already had an outstanding warrant.My No. 4239 addressed to Maxwell and repeated to you was sent before receiving your telegram under reply.He was a new breed, that parson, a genuwine no-two-alike, come-one-in-a-box kind.A pupil had loaned money to a horse-dealer who lived at No. 715 of a certain street.Papa, can't I go to the zoologerical rooms to see the camomile fight the rhy-no-sir-ee-hoss?On her hand was one large pustulous sore, which resembled that delinated in Plate No. 1.Why Do “Left” And “Right” Mean Liberal And Conservative?What Is An Em Dash And How Do You Use It?9 Types Of Poems To Spark Your CreativityWhat Is The Difference Between “It’s” And “Its”?9 Of The Most Common Types of PronounsWhat Do “a.m.” And “p.m.” Stand For?In addition to the idioms beginning with noalso see: WORD OF THE DAYThe Most Surprisingly Serendipitous Words Of The DayThe Dictionary.com Word Of The Year For 2020 Is …“Have” vs. “Has”: When To Use Each One“Affect” vs. “Effect”: Use The Correct Word Every Time